5
2
0
2

r
p
A
8

]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
3
4
1
7
0
.
4
0
5
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Functionally graded keratin facilitates
tactile sensing in elephant whiskers

Andrew K. Schulz1,∗, Lena V. Kaufmann2,+, Lawrence T. Smith3,+,
Deepti S. Philip1,4, Hilda David4, Jelena Lazovic5,
Michael Brecht2, Gunther Richter4, Katherine J. Kuchenbecker1,∗
1Haptic Intelligence Department, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems (MPI-IS), Stuttgart, Germany
2Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin, Humboldt University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany
3Robotic Materials Department, MPI-IS, Stuttgart, Germany
4Materials Central Scientific Facility, MPI-IS, Stuttgart, Germany
5Medical Systems Central Scientific Facility, MPI-IS, Stuttgart, Germany

+ denotes equal contribution
* Co-corresponding authors:
Andrew K. Schulz and Katherine J. Kuchenbecker
Heisenbergstraße 3, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
aschulz@is.mpg.de & kjk@is.mpg.de

Abstract

Keratin composites enable animals to hike with hooves, fly with feathers, and sense with skin. These distinct

functions arise from variations in the underlying properties and microscale arrangement of this natural

polymer. One well-studied example is mammalian whiskers, elongated keratin rods attached to tactile skin

structures that extend the animal’s sensory volume. Here, we investigate the non-actuated whiskers that

cover Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) trunks and find they are geometrically and mechanically tailored

to facilitate tactile perception by encoding contact location in vibrotactile signal amplitude and frequency.

Elephant whiskers emerge from armored trunk skin and shift from a thick, circular, porous, stiff root to a thin,

ovular, dense, soft point. This smooth transition enables interaction with widely varying substrates, reduces

wear, and increases the vibrotactile signal information generated during contact. The functionally graded

geometry, porosity, and stiffness of elephant whiskers tune the neuromechanics of trunk touch, facilitating

highly dexterous manipulation.

Introduction

Whiskers, tree bark, seashells, and other biological composites consist of proteins, sugars, and minerals [1],

giving living organisms diverse mechanical and functional properties through morphology and composi-

tion [2]. One of these biological building blocks, the protein keratin, is arranged in alpha helices in mam-

malian epidermis, horns, nails, and hair, such as the dense, hollow fur that helps polar bears thermoregulate

in arctic temperatures [3]. Alpha-keratin helices occur at the 7-nm length scale [4], and the structures

they create have diverse mechanical forms that support the keratinized structure’s functional use: for ex-

ample, bighorn sheep horns contain hollow tubules that increase shock absorption [5], and the tapering of

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
rat whiskers facilitates texture discrimination by allowing the whisker points to mechanically interact with

tiny surface asperities [6]. The thicker root of each rat whisker is actuated by a collagen protein wrapper,

increasing the animal’s sensory volume [7]. Keratin itself cannot sense touch, but this keratin-collagen inter-

face is ringed by sensory neurons, creating the three components of familiar whiskers: hair, collagen wrapper

(follicle), and sensory ring (Fig. 1A) [8].

This intriguing somatosensory structure has both incentivized biologists and neuroscientists to understand

whisker neuromechanics [9, 10, 11, 12, 13] and inspired several robotic whisker designs [14, 15, 16, 17].

Past research on whisker morphology and function has primarily focused on the follicle and sensory ring

structures [18, 19, 20], as well as the scaly wall known as the cuticle (Fig. 1B). Mouse whiskers increase in

elastic modulus from the root to the point by a factor of two [21], and seal whiskers decrease in modulus by

the same ratio [22]. Researchers typically average these moduli [14, 23, 13] and assume the whisker is solid

and uniform throughout. Instead of exploring the effects of nonuniform material properties, the focus has

been on morphology, determining how whisker length [9], tapering [6], aspect ratio [22], and actuation [24]

impact the mechanical frequencies or torques communicated to the whisker root (Fig. 1B). Elephant trunk

whiskers are unique among studied mammalian taxa as they lack muscles in the root follicle (Fig. 1C) [19].

These non-whisking whiskers adorn a hydrostat with approximately 90 000 muscle fascicles [25] capable of

near-infinite-degree-of-freedom motions [26] that generate ample whisker-object contact.

Whiskers extend the sensory function of the elephant trunk, assisting with precision manipulation of

widely varying items including hundreds of kilograms of food daily [19, 27]. We hypothesize that the

elephant’s lack of individual whisker actuation is accompanied by striking geometrical and material differences

compared to actuatable whiskers, such as those of domesticated cats (Felis catus) or rats (Rattus norvegicus).

This hypothesis is tested in baby and adult Asian elephants (Elephas maximus) by studying the three

parameters governing their mechanical behavior: geometry, porosity, and elastic modulus [28] (Fig. 1E).

Microscopy and material characterization allow us to describe how elephant whisker parameters shift from

root to point. Finite element analysis (FEA) of whiskers with nonuniform cross section, porosity, and

modulus demonstrates how whisker morphology and composition affect what is felt by the sensory neurons

at the whisker root.

Tapered ellipsoidal whiskers highlight contact directionality

We used microscopy and microCT to characterize elephant whisker geometry, including longitudinal tapering

and cross-sectional shape. First, whiskers from the distal and proximal sections of an Asian elephant’s trunk

were compared. We imaged each whisker from its root (embedded in the skin) to its point (extending beyond

2

the skin and interacting with the environment). Whiskers from the distal trunk are thin, highly tapered, and

blade-like (Fig. 1C–F, fig. S1A–B, movie S1). The whisker cross section’s long axis aligns with the trunk’s

circumferential wrinkles (fig. S1D), and its ellipsoidal aspect ratio increases by 40% as the elephant develops

(Fig. 1G). The whiskers of pinniped species also have an ovular cross-sectional shape (Fig. 1G, table S1),

which confers sensory benefits in preferred directions in water [22]. The distal trunk is used for gripping and

manipulation [29], so its blade-like whiskers could facilitate directional contact perception; indeed, researchers

have long hypothesized that elephants use their distal whiskers for precise tactile sensory discrimination [30].

This blade-like whisker structure also appears more rectangular than ovular near the root, which could alter

the bending rigidity in preferred directions similar to the round-to-square cross-sectional transition in bird

feather rachis [31].

Whiskers from the proximal trunk are thicker, only gently tapered, and nearly circular (Fig. 1F, fig.

S1C, movie S1). Their aspect ratios match those of other terrestrial animals’ whiskers (table S1) and are

significantly more circular than the whiskers of the distal trunk and aquatic mammals (n = 5, Fig. 1G,

p < 0.001). Elephant proximal whiskers are also wavy, with undulating radius changes along the whisker

length (Fig. 1F, fig. S1C, movie S1), similar to pinnipeds [22], which could reduce vibrations when moving

through air or water, as has been shown in seals [22]. Interestingly, proximal elephant trunk whiskers are

much less tapered than distal whiskers, and their points round to a diameter of 0.59 ± 0.07 mm (n = 5,

Fig. 1F). Similar to mechanical curb feelers on early cars, the elephant’s proximal whiskers may perform

omnidirectional proximity sensing to identify obstacles near the face, compensating for the animal’s poor

eyesight [32].

Considering each whisker as a long, slender rod, we modeled its flexural rigidity, K, as a function of the

material stiffness, E, and the cross section’s second moment of area, I [33]. Therefore, whisker tapering, or

reduction of the diameter D along the whisker length z, represents an influential method of controlling local

whisker flexibility, as K ∝ D4. (Graded material stiffness, E(z), is explored later.) A tiny diameter at the

point (as seen in distal but not proximal elephant trunk whiskers) helps with texture discrimination [34] and

allows penetration into the depth of rough materials to detect surface features [35] and even discriminate

shapes [34]. These geometrical parameters of aspect ratio and tapering are the current focus of many whisker

researchers, while few studies have explored micron-scale factors that affect whisker mechanics.

Elephant whiskers exhibit a horn-like microstructure

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images showed that most Asian elephant whiskers analyzed from the

adult (both distal and proximal sections) are encased by an axially scarred cuticle (Fig. 2A) that appears

3

to be unique among studied whiskers. In contrast, portions of the roots of baby elephant whiskers and all

examined elephant body hairs have a scaly cuticle (fig. S2A) like that found along the lengths of whiskers and

body hairs of other terrestrial mammals (Fig. 2B–D, fig. S2A,C). The primary function of a scaly cuticle is

thought to be to preserve the mechanical integrity of the hair during deformations [36]. The baby elephant

distal trunk whiskers that we imaged had scales only at the widest points of the root; thus, these scales might

contribute to development of the whisker as a blade-like structure, as the scales grow over time (fig. S1B).

However, there is no indication of scales at the baby elephant whisker point (fig. S2B), indicating they do

not wear off later from abrasion, which is commonly assumed when whiskers lack a scaly cuticle [37]. Given

this lack of scales and the scarred outer wall of elephant trunk whiskers, the most similar keratin structures

are mammalian horns, antlers, and porcupine quills [38]. Such structures contain porous cavities, known as

tubules, along their length.

We observed porous macro- and micro-scale axial channels in the microCT images of elephant trunk

whisker roots (Fig. 1F, movie S1). These channels were visualized by SEM imaging cryotome-sliced whisker

sections showing the transverse cross section (fig. S3A–B). The inner matrix of elephant whiskers has lon-

gitudinal keratin strands packed and wrapped tightly around large and small tubules (Fig. 2F–H). For

comparison, the tail hair of Asian elephants has been shown to contain a few medulla channels [39], and

elephant body hair has a single medulla channel [36]. The macro channels seen in elephant whiskers are

30–40 µm in diameter (Fig. 2F-G) and are arranged at the root, similar to the tubules in antlers, bighorn

sheep horn (fig. S4A-B), and horse hooves [40]. Tubules provide added benefits for energy dissipation in horn

structures [38] and change the material porosity only slightly [40]. Therefore, the more numerous tubule

channels present in elephant whiskers may provide benefits beyond the energy dissipation of previously

studied keratinous horns.

Functionally porous whiskers amplify tactile signal transmission through mass

reduction

We determine the porosity along the length of each studied elephant whisker using microCT and see a strong

porosity gradient: elephant whisker roots are highly porous (∼70%) and transition from ∼15% porosity at

20% of normalized whisker length to fully dense (∼0% porosity) by the middle of the whisker. Distal trunk

whiskers have a root porosity of 82 ± 9% (n = 5) with the numerous medullary channels appearing as a

hollow shell (Fig. 1G, Fig. 2I). Proximal whiskers have a somewhat less-porous root (63 ± 7%, n = 5) that

also promptly transitions to a dense structure (Fig. 2I); the density difference between the roots of proximal

and distal trunk whiskers is significant (p < 0.05). Since the medullas of cat and rat whiskers occupy only

4

2–5% of the whisker cross section (Fig. 2I) [9], previous investigations have assumed that all whiskers are

fully dense, but elephant whiskers clearly break this assumption.

A whisker transmits tactile information from contacts along its length to the sensing structures at its

root through vibrations, enabling the animal to distinguish obstacles, food, or prey [41]. Experiments on

whisker models with axially graded porosity (table S2, fig. S5) indicate that functional grading of porosity

plays a role in transmitting this information. Finite element analysis of graded-porosity whiskers shows that

elevated root porosity modestly increases the natural frequency of the first five vibration modes (<10%)

compared to whiskers with no porosity (Fig. 2J). The increase in frequencies follows intuitively from basic

beam theory [33], as porous whiskers have reduced volumetric mass, m, which is inversely related to the
square of the natural frequency, ω, of the beam: ω ∝ (cid:112)K/m. We hypothesize that the primary function of

very high root porosity in elephant whiskers is to increase resistance to the dynamic impacts that commonly

occur during fast head and trunk movements. Importantly, our analysis shows that this large decrease in

whisker mass does not negatively impact the neuromechanics of touch in the elephant.

More broadly, porosity is known to confer dynamic benefits to both manufactured and biological com-

posites. Porosity allows materials to efficiently absorb energy during impact loading while simultaneously

reducing mass [42], which facilitates control and reduces the energy cost of movement. Porous roots may

reduce the damage these whiskers sustain across a lifetime of mechanical use, which is essential as adult

elephants spend around 16 hours per day foraging [27] and often live at least 60 years in the wild. Ad-

ditionally, damage reduction is biologically crucial since elephants appear unable to regrow whiskers [19],

unlike rodents [43]. We conclude that porosity of the whisker root gives the elephant trunk an array of thin

sensory horns that resist damage from impact while communicating clear higher-frequency signals to the

mechanoreceptors in their follicles.

Elastomer-pointed elephant whiskers tolerate loads and encode contact location

In addition to geometry and porosity, elastic modulus can also change along the length of a functionally

graded beam [44]. To determine whether the material changes along the length of elephant whiskers, we

used pico-indentation into the wall at the root and at the point of whiskers from the distal section of the

studied elephant trunks (Fig. 3A–F, fig. S6A-B). When an Asian elephant is two weeks old, its distal whiskers

already have a significant functional material grade of almost one order of magnitude: the root modulus of

0.57 ± 0.02 GPa (n = 4) shifts to a softer point modulus of 0.1013 ± 0.004 GPa (n = 4) p < 10−5, Fig. 3E).

As the elephant develops, this functional gradient greatly increases, and the root modulus increases by an

order of magnitude to 2.99 ± 0.28 GPa (n = 5). The point of the whisker changes by a comparatively small

5

amount to 0.706 ± 0.008 GPa (n = 5), meaning adult elephant’s whiskers have a significant stiffness gradient

spanning two orders of magnitude (p < 10−5, Fig. 3F), matched to that of squid’s composite beak [45]. We

see a similarly significant large modulus shift (p < 10−5) in the studied cat whiskers (Fig. 3I) with a root

modulus of 2.24 ± 0.05 GPa (n = 5) and a point modulus of 0.01 ± 0.0005 (n = 5); this shifting from a stiff

root to a soft point is opposite the gradient found in rats, though their modulus shifts by only a factor of 1.5

from root to point [21]. All previously studied whiskers (table S3) show only a small modulus range around

a factor of 3 from root to point.

Our indentation data demonstrates that the elephant’s whisker exhibits nonuniform elastic and plastic

mechanical behavior at different locations along its length. Following indentation near the root, the whisker

wall remains deformed (Fig. 3E-F), a plasticity behavior commonly observed in polymers (0.09 GPa ≤

natural polymers ≤ 100 GPa). Following indentation at the point, the elephant whisker responds elastically

(Fig. 3C-D), with no permanent deformation, a behavior commonly observed in elastomers (≤ 0.09 GPa) [46].

Therefore, baby and adult elephant whiskers are natural polymer-elastomer composites (Fig. 3G-H), which

have never before been observed in a mammalian keratin structure; the closest finding showed that hydration

can reduce the moduli of alpha-keratin structures by one order of magnitude [47].

Static finite element analysis of whisker deformation indicates that functional grading of elastic modulus

from a stiff root to a soft point distributes stresses more evenly, enables larger tip displacements, and

modifies the frequency response of the whisker compared to homogeneous whiskers (fig. S7A). We compared

the mechanical response of whiskers with the modulus gradient measured in adult elephant whiskers against

uniform whiskers of constant modulus 3.3 GPa (fig. S8) [21] and predicted the displacement and stress fields

when the root is fixed in space, and displacements or loads are prescribed at the point. Graded whiskers

exhibit nearly double the displacement magnitude at equivalent point loading compared to homogeneous

whiskers (Fig. 4A-B). Mechanoreceptors near the distal portion of the dermis in the skin would detect

this increased displacement from the whisker’s follicle, communicating a large deformation to the strain

mechanoreceptors located at the root surrounding the whisker follicle.

A soft point confers added benefits for interacting with rigid stationary objects such as stone, as the

whisker point can lightly brush past rigid external stimuli, an advantage of soft materials [15]. In simulations

that reflect this scenario, where large transverse displacements at the point are prescribed (fig. S7B), the

functionally graded elephant whisker exhibits 33% lower peak stresses at the root relative to homogeneous

whiskers (Fig. 4C-D, movie S2). Reduction in stress concentrations at the whisker root leads to a reduced

chance of failure or breakage compared to an isotropic structure with constant properties. This reduction

of stress has previously been shown in the slender structures on gecko feet, known as setae, which are

functionally graded in modulus [48].

6

Whiskers with a modulus ratio Epoint/Eroot ≈ 10−2 from point to root, including those of the adult

elephant and domesticated cat, have a first natural frequency that is double that of whiskers with the inverse

ratio (Fig. 4E, movie S3). Whiskers with a soft root and stiff point also likely do not exist in nature as the

vibration communicated to the root is so reduced in amplitude and frequency that it falls in the smallest

range of sensing capable for mammalian mechanoreceptors (Fig. 4E). Whiskers like the elephant’s (stiff

root, soft point) have a slightly smaller vibrotactile signal compared to homogeneous whiskers, with their

first natural frequency reduced by 15%; however, this reduction is offset by the amplification from the porous

root (Fig. 2J).

Finally, we look at how modulus grading affects tactile perception of impacts along the length of the

whisker. We model whiskers using nonlinear beam finite elements in a loading scenario that approximates

brushing past obstacles and subsequent free vibration in space (fig. S7D). We monitor the time-varying

reaction moment at the root of the simulated whisker, where position and orientation are fixed, and compute

the discrete Fourier transform of this signal to observe the frequency content of the information transmitted

to the sensory ring (fig. S9A). Functionally graded whiskers transmit vibrations of exponentially higher

amplitude under equivalent loading compared to homogeneous stiff whiskers (Fig. 4F-G, fig. S9C, movie

S4).

As the excitation location moves toward the root of a graded whisker, the vibration amplitude transmitted

to the sensory ring grows non-linearly, enabling logarithmic differentiation (Fig. 4G) of transient contacts

along the whisker. In contrast, a whisker with uniform properties exhibits near-linear signal differentiation

(Fig. 4F). Signal power at the whisker root, known to drive the firing of sensory neurons [49], changes

much more dramatically with contact location in graded whiskers than in uniform whiskers; compared to

homogeneous whiskers in identical conditions, our simulations of graded whiskers show a 2 000% increase in

signal power when plucked at 60% of their length (Fig. 4H), which is an additional 4 dB of signal power

transmitted to the root (fig. S9D). These functional benefits of stiffness-gradient whiskers should allow more

precise localization of transient contact along the whisker length.

Conclusions

Biological structures have functionally graded material properties, but these anisotropies are frequently

ignored in favor of simple isotropic models that vary only in geometry. This assumption has limited our

understanding of whisker-mediated touch and prevented bio-inspired whiskers from taking advantage of

material shifts in porosity and modulus; existing designs are primarily soft materials that lack rigidity [50]

or rigid materials that lack flexibility [51]. This work showed that the alpha-keratin in elephant whiskers

7

is functionally graded in geometry, porosity, and stiffness. The porosity and stiffness gradients of elephant

trunk whiskers directly influence the frequency, amplitude, and power of the mechanical signals felt by

mechanoreceptors in the follicle upon mechanical stimulation. Shifting from a stiff root to a soft point also

amplifies the signal power connected to the firing of sensory neurons [49], potentially improving the animal’s

ability to perceive the location of contact along each whisker, which would aid navigation and manipulation.

Biological functionally graded material composites like elephant whiskers can inspire engineered devices

that use functional gradients to achieve specific capabilities ranging from fatigue reduction to signal power

increases. One of the first animal stiffness gradients discovered was the beak of the Humboldt squid [45],

but mimicry of this stiffness gradient in soft materials posed a considerable manufacturing challenge at the

time of this discovery. Recent advances in multi-material 3D printing enable unprecedented control over

the deposition of materials with widely varying mechanical properties; cutting-edge inkjet systems create

monolithic parts from materials with elastic moduli that span three orders of magnitude [52, 53]. Recent

characterization of composites built from these materials enables inverse design, whereby one achieves desired

system properties such as stiffness, toughness, and frequency response by prescribing both geometry and

constituent materials at the microscale [54]. Fields ranging from material science and neuroscience to haptics

and bio-inspired robotics rely on signal processing through material interfaces, and functional gradients have

significant potential to enable programmable signal shifts tuned to specific use cases.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank C. Schwarz for advice on whisker neuromechanics, B. Sharratt for conversations regarding

functionally graded materials, T. Hildebrandt for assistance in acquisition of the elephant specimens, S.

Merker and the Stuttgart State Museum of Natural History for the bighorn sheep horn sample, the Berlin

Zoological Garden for providing Asian elephant adult head hair, R. Faulkner for assistance with creating

physical whisker mimics, S. Griego for assistance with SEM images, B. Javot for assistance with bighorn

sheep horn sample preparation, N. Reveyaz for whisker collection assistance, and J. Burns for help with

data curation. L.K. thanks the Berlin School of Mind and Brain at Humboldt University. M.B. thanks the

NeuroCure Cluster of Excellence at Humboldt University.

Funding:

This work was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (to A.K.S.), the Max Planck Society

(to G.R. and K.J.K.), the Carl-Schneider-Stiftung (to G.R. and K.J.K.), BCCN Berlin, Humboldt-Universit¨at

zu Berlin (to L.V.K. and M.B.), and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun-

dation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC-2049 – 390688087 (to L.V.K. and M.B).

8

Author Contributions:

A.K.S., G.R., and K.J.K. conceived the idea and designed the experiments. A.K.S., M.B., G.R., and K.J.K.

supervised the research project. A.K.S., L.V.K., L.T.S., D.S.P., H.D., J.L., and G.R. conducted the exper-

iments. A.K.S., L.V.K., L.T.S., D.S.P., H.D., J.L., M.B., G.R., and K.J.K. analyzed the data. All authors

contributed to the writing and editing of the manuscript.

Competing interests:

The authors declare no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:

Raw indentation data, microCT data, and SEM images can be found at [55]. The authors have provided

bitmap prints of all SEM images in the data repository for digital accessibility, along with lithograph 3D

model files made using the process from Koone et al. [56]. The authors have also provided a repository

for finite element simulation of whiskers with stiffness, porosity, and/or geometry gradients in static and

dynamic cases [57].

9

Figure 1: Morphology of animal whisker systems with a framework for studying whisker
geometry, porosity, and stiffness. (A) The rat whisker-skin system with whisker morphology shown
in (B) displays differences between root and point. (C) The Asian elephant whisker-skin system showing
distal trunk whiskers, which lack a follicle muscle [19], with whisker morphology shown in (D) displaying
(E) Experiment flowchart used to study how the three variables of
differences between root and point.
whisker geometry, porosity, and stiffness affect tactile perception through the whisker. (F) Schematic of an
elephant trunk showing the two regions (distal and proximal) from which whiskers were analyzed, with an
enlarged microCT rendering and three cross sections for each representative whisker. (G) The maximum
aspect ratio, γmax, of Asian elephant trunk whiskers compared to whiskers of aquatic and terrestrial species,
with elephants displaying significant differences in cross-section geometry between distal and proximal regions
(⋆⋆⋆ p < 0.001).

10

Figure 2: Elephant whiskers display horn-like microstructure that decreases mass and increases
vibration frequency. SEM images of various whisker wall structures with adult elephant whisker root in
(A), adult elephant distal whisker root in (B), baby elephant distal whisker root in (C), and rat whisker root
in (D). SEM images of transverse whisker cross sections with rat whisker shown in (E), elephant whisker
cortex and non-scaly wall in (F), tubule channels in elephant whisker root in (G), and individual longitudinal
keratin fibers around tubule wall in (H). (I) Porosity of four different whisker types (rat, cat, elephant distal
trunk, elephant proximal trunk) along the normalized whisker location. Data of rat whiskers taken from
Voges et al. [9]. Significant differences were found between proximal and distal adult elephant whiskers
at the root (⋆ p < 0.05). (J) FEA outputs of the free-vibration response of whiskers with three different
density ratios between the point and root. Simulated whiskers with a porous root and dense point have
eigenfrequencies that are spread across a broader range of frequencies than otherwise identical whiskers with
constant density.

11

Figure 3: Elephant and cat whiskers have functionally graded stiffness spanning two orders
of magnitude. (A) Illustration of the cube-corner indenter used for modulus characterization of whiskers.
(B) Raw cyclic-loading data of cat whisker root indentation showing the specific depths at which moduli
were extracted. Indentation of adult elephant whisker point (C to D) showing whisker wall resilience after
indentation. Indentation of adult elephant whisker root (E to F) showing permanent plastic deformation
after indentation. Indentation data shows four contact depths for the adult Asian elephant in (G), the baby
Asian elephant in (H), and the domesticated cat in (I). The shaded background indicates elastomer and
polymer regions [46], while stars indicate significant differences (⋆⋆⋆ p < 0.001).

12

Figure 4: Functionally graded elastic modulus provides both static and dynamic benefits for
tactile sensing. Simulation results when fixed-root whiskers are loaded with an equivalent transverse force
at the point, with homogeneous in (A) and functionally graded stiffness in (B). Simulation results show that
when whisker point displacement is prescribed, the root of a stiff (E = 3 GPa) homogeneous whisker in (C)
experiences far higher stress than that of a whisker with functionally graded stiffness in (D). (E) Simulated
frequencies of free vibration for homogeneous stiff (black) and stiffness-gradient (red and yellow) whisker
structures (fig. S8). Simulation outputs of the whisker response after transient contact for homogeneous in
(F) and soft-point-to-stiff-root functionally graded stiffness in (G). (H) Simulation showing the percentage
of signal power change communicated to the whisker root when plucked at different locations.

13

References

[1] Michaela Eder, Shahrouz Amini, and Peter Fratzl. Biological composites—complex structures for functional diversity.

Science, 362(6414):543–547, November 2018.

[2] Bin Wang, Wen Yang, Joanna McKittrick, and Marc Andr´e Meyers. Keratin: Structure, mechanical properties, occurrence

in biological organisms, and efforts at bioinspiration. Progress in Materials Science, 76:229–318, March 2016.

[3] Mingrui Wu, Ziyu Shao, Nifang Zhao, Rongzhen Zhang, Guodong Yuan, Lulu Tian, Zibei Zhang, Weiwei Gao, and Hao
Bai. Biomimetic, knittable aerogel fiber for thermal insulation textile. Science, 382(6677):1379–1383, December 2023.

[4] John M. Squire and Peter J. Vibert. Fibrous Protein Structure. 1987. Google-Books-ID: DVl zQEACAAJ.

[5] Wei Huang, Alireza Zaheri, Jae-Young Jung, Horacio D. Espinosa, and Joanna Mckittrick. Hierarchical structure and
compressive deformation mechanisms of bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis) horn. Acta Biomaterialia, 64:1–14, December
2017.

[6] Christopher M. Williams and Eric M. Kramer. The Advantages of a Tapered Whisker. PLOS ONE, 5(1):e8806, January

2010.

[7] Robyn A. Grant and Victor G. A. Goss. What can whiskers tell us about mammalian evolution, behaviour, and ecology?

Mammal Review, 52(1):148–163, 2022.

[8] Jochen F. Staiger and Carl C. H. Petersen. Neuronal Circuits in Barrel Cortex for Whisker Sensory Perception. Physiological

Reviews, 101(1):353–415, January 2021.

[9] Danja Voges, Kathrin Carl, Gertrud J. Klauer, Ren´e Uhlig, Cornelius Schilling, Carsten Behn, and Hartmut Witte.
Structural Characterization of the Whisker System of the Rat. IEEE Sensors Journal, 12(2):332–339, February 2012.

[10] Carly C Ginter. Comparative Analysis of the Morphology and Materials Properties of Pinniped Vibrissae. PhD thesis,

Texas A&M, 2011.

[11] H. Hans, J. M. Miao, and M. S. Triantafyllou. Mechanical characteristics of harbor seal (Phoca vitulina) vibrissae under
different circumstances and their implications on its sensing methodology. Bioinspiration & Biomimetics, 9(3):036013,
May 2014.

[12] Sophie Laturnus, Adrian Hoffmann, Shubhodeep Chakrabarti, and Cornelius Schwarz. Functional analysis of information
rates conveyed by rat whisker-related trigeminal nuclei neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 125(4):1517–1531, April 2021.

[13] Maysam Oladazimi, Wieland Brendel, and Cornelius Schwarz. Biomechanical Texture Coding in Rat Whiskers. Scientific

Reports, 8(1):11139, July 2018.

[14] Chonglin Zhao, Shouming Zhang, Tao Xie, and Lu Zeng. A novel whisker sensor with variable detection range for object

positioning. Review of Scientific Instruments, 93(3):035007, March 2022.

[15] Jahan Zeb Gul, Kim Young Su, and Kyung Hyun Choi. Fully 3D Printed Multi-Material Soft Bio-Inspired Whisker Sensor

for Underwater-Induced Vortex Detection. Soft Robotics, 5(2):122–132, April 2018.

[16] Pablo Valdivia y Alvarado, Vignesh Subramaniam, and Michael Triantafyllou. Design of a bio-inspired whisker sensor for

underwater applications. In IEEE SENSORS, pages 1–4, October 2012. ISSN: 1930-0395.

[17] Joseph H. Solomon and Mitra J. Hartmann. Robotic whiskers used to sense features. Nature, 443(7111):525–525, October

2006.

[18] Jeong-Nam Kim, Ja-Young Yoo, Ju-Young Lee, Ki-Seok Koh, and Wu-Chul Song. A Mechanism of Rat Vibrissal Movement
Based on Actual Morphology of the Intrinsic Muscle Using Three-Dimensional Reconstruction. Cells Tissues Organs,
196(6):565–569, June 2012.

[19] Nora Deiringer, Undine Schneeweiß, Lena V. Kaufmann, Lennart Eigen, Celina Speissegger, Ben Gerhardt, Susanne Holtze,
Guido Fritsch, Frank G¨oritz, Rolf Becker, Andreas Ochs, Thomas Hildebrandt, and Michael Brecht. The functional anatomy
of elephant trunk whiskers. Communications Biology, 6(1):1–12, June 2023.

[20] Jun Takatoh, Vincent Prevosto, and Fan Wang. Vibrissa Sensory Neurons: Linking Distinct Morphology to Specific

Physiology and Function. Neuroscience, 368:109–114, January 2018.

[21] Brian W. Quist, Rafay A. Faruqi, and Mitra J. Z. Hartmann. Variation in Young’s modulus along the length of a rat

vibrissa. Journal of Biomechanics, 44(16):2775–2781, November 2011.

[22] Amar M. Kamat, Xingwen Zheng, Julian Bos, Ming Cao, Michael S. Triantafyllou, and Ajay Giri Prakash Kottapalli.
Undulating Seal Whiskers Evolved Optimal Wavelength-to-Diameter Ratio for Efficient Reduction in Vortex-Induced
Vibrations. Advanced Science, 11(2):2304304, 2024.

[23] Maysam Oladazimi, Thibaut Putelat, Robert Szalai, Kentaro Noda, Isao Shimoyama, Alan Champneys, and Cornelius

Schwarz. Conveyance of texture signals along a rat whisker. Scientific Reports, 11(1):13570, June 2021.

[24] Robyn A. Grant, Ben Mitchinson, Charles W. Fox, and Tony J. Prescott. Active Touch Sensing in the Rat: Anticipatory
and Regulatory Control of Whisker Movements During Surface Exploration. Journal of Neurophysiology, 101(2):862–874,
February 2009.

[25] Luke L. Longren, Lennart Eigen, Ani Shubitidze, Oliver Lieschnegg, Daniel Baum, John A. Nyakatura, Thomas Hilde-
brandt, and Michael Brecht. Dense reconstruction of elephant trunk musculature. Current Biology, 33(21):4713–4720.e3,
November 2023.

14

[26] Andrew K. Schulz, Madeline Boyle, Colin Boyle, Sophia Sordilla, Catalina Rincon, Scott Hooper, Catie Aubuchon, Joy S.
Reidenberg, Claire Higgins, and David L. Hu. Skin wrinkles and folds enable asymmetric stretch in the elephant trunk.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(31):e2122563119, August 2022.

[27] Andrew K. Schulz, Jia Ning Wu, Sung Yeon Sara Ha, Greena Kim, Stephanie Braccini Slade, Sam Rivera, Joy S. Rei-
denberg, and David L. Hu. Suction feeding by elephants. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 18(179):20210215,
2021.

[28] Mitra Hartmann. Vibrissa Mechanical Properties.

In Tony Prescott, Ehud Ahissar, and Eugene Izhikevich, editors,

Scholarpedia of Touch, pages 591–614. Paris, 2016.

[29] Paule Dagenais, Sean Hensman, Val´erie Haechler, and Michel C. Milinkovitch. Elephants evolved strategies reducing the

biomechanical complexity of their trunk. Current Biology, 31(21):4727–4737.e4, November 2021.

[30] G. Dehnhardt, C. Friese, N. Sachser, G. Dehnhardt, C. Friese, and N. Sachser. Sensitivity of the trunk of Asian elephants
for texture differences of actively touched objects. Zeitschrift fuer Saeugetierkunde, 62(Suppl 2):37–39, January 1997.
Number: Suppl 2.

[31] Bin Wang and Marc Andr´e Meyers. Light Like a Feather: A Fibrous Natural Composite with a Shape Changing from

Round to Square. Advanced Science, 4(3):1600360, 2017.

[32] Michael Garstang. Elephant Sense and Sensibility. February 2015. Google-Books-ID: OrSYBAAAQBAJ.

[33] Liang-Wu Cai. Fundamentals of Mechanical Vibrations. June 2016. Google-Books-ID: KrI7CwAAQBAJ.

[34] Samuel Andrew Hires, Lorenz Pammer, Karel Svoboda, and David Golomb. Tapered whiskers are required for active

tactile sensation. eLife, 2:e01350, November 2013.

[35] Shantanu P. Jadhav, Jason Wolfe, and Daniel E. Feldman. Sparse temporal coding of elementary tactile features during

active whisker sensation. Nature Neuroscience, 12(6):792–800, June 2009.

[36] Wen Yang, Yang Yu, Robert O. Ritchie, and Marc A. Meyers. On the Strength of Hair across Species. Matter, 2(1):136–149,

January 2020.

[37] Gary Dougill, Charlotte A. Brassey, Eugene L. Starostin, Hayley Andrews, Andrew Kitchener, Gert H. M. van der Heijden,
Victor G. A. Goss, and Robyn A. Grant. Describing whisker morphology of the Carnivora. Journal of Morphology,
284(9):e21628, 2023.

[38] W. Yang, C. Chao, and J. McKittrick. Axial compression of a hollow cylinder filled with foam: A study of porcupine

quills. Acta Biomaterialia, 9(2):5297–5304, February 2013.

[39] Bonnie C. Yates, Edgard O. Espinoza, and Barry W. Baker. Forensic species identification of elephant (Elephantidae) and
giraffe (Giraffidae) tail hair using light microscopy. Forensic Science, Medicine, and Pathology, 6(3):165–171, September
2010.

[40] Ruixin Mi, Z. Z. Shao, and F. Vollrath. Creating artificial Rhino Horns from Horse Hair. Scientific Reports, 9(1):16233,

December 2019.

[41] Mathew E. Diamond, Moritz von Heimendahl, Per Magne Knutsen, David Kleinfeld, and Ehud Ahissar.
’what’ in the whisker sensorimotor system. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(8):601–612, August 2008.

’Where’ and

[42] Benjamin S. Lazarus, Audrey Velasco-Hogan, Teresa G´omez-del R´ıo, Marc A. Meyers, and Iwona Jasiuk. A review of
impact resistant biological and bioinspired materials and structures. Journal of Materials Research and Technology,
9(6):15705–15738, November 2020.

[43] R. F. Oliver. Whisker growth after removal of the dermal papilla and lengths of follicle in the hooded rat. Development,

15(3):331–347, June 1966.

[44] Yan Li, Zuying Feng, Liang Hao, Lijing Huang, Chenxing Xin, Yushen Wang, Emiliano Bilotti, Khamis Essa, Han Zhang,
Zheng Li, Feifei Yan, and Ton Peijs. A Review on Functionally Graded Materials and Structures via Additive Manu-
facturing: From Multi-Scale Design to Versatile Functional Properties. Advanced Materials Technologies, 5(6):1900981,
2020.

[45] Ali Miserez, Todd Schneberk, Chengjun Sun, Frank W. Zok, and J. Herbert Waite. The Transition from Stiff to Compliant

Materials in Squid Beaks. Science, 319(5871):1816–1819, March 2008.

[46] U. G. K. Wegst and M. F. Ashby. The Mechanical Efficiency of Natural Materials. Philosophical Magazine, 84(21):2167–

2186, 2004.

[47] Daniel A. Greenberg and Douglas S. Fudge. Regulation of hard alpha-keratin mechanics via control of intermediate filament
hydration: matrix squeeze revisited. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 280(1750):20122158, January
2013.

[48] Xiaoxiao Dong, Rui Zhang, Yu Tian, Melvin A. Ramos, Travis Shihao Hu, Zhihang Wang, Hong Zhao, Lipeng Zhang,
Yiyang Wan, Zhenhai Xia, and Quan Xu. Functionally Graded Gecko Setae and the Biomimics with Robust Adhesion
and Durability. ACS Applied Polymer Materials, 2(7):2658–2666, July 2020.

[49] Eran Lottem and Rony Azouz. Mechanisms of Tactile Information Transmission through Whisker Vibrations. The Journal

of Neuroscience, 29(37):11686–11697, September 2009.

[50] Mohammad Sheikh Sofla, Srikishan Vayakkattil, and Marcello Calisti. Haptic Localization with a Soft Whisker from

Moment Readings at the Base. Soft Robotics, January 2024.

15

[51] Mohamad-Ammar Sayegh, Hammam Daraghma, Samir Mekid, and Salem Bashmal. Review of Recent Bio-Inspired Design

and Manufacturing of Whisker Tactile Sensors. Sensors, 22(7):2705, January 2022.

[52] Viacheslav Slesarenko and Stephan Rudykh. Towards mechanical characterization of soft digital materials for multimaterial

3D-printing. International Journal of Engineering Science, 123:62–72, February 2018.

[53] J. Mueller, K. Shea, and C. Daraio. Mechanical properties of parts fabricated with inkjet 3D printing through efficient

experimental design. Materials & Design, 86:902–912, December 2015.

[54] Lawrence T. Smith and Robert B. MacCurdy. Digital Multiphase Composites via Additive Manufacturing. Advanced

Materials, n/a(n/a):2308491, 2024.

[55] Andrew Kyle Schulz, Lena Valentina Kaufmann, Lawrence Smith, Deepti Philip, Hilda David, Jelena Lazovic Zinnanti,
Michael Brecht, Gunther Richter, and Katherine J. Kuchenbecker. Data for: Functionally graded keratin facilitates tactile
sensing in elephant whiskers, 2025.

[56] Jordan C. Koone, Chad M. Dashnaw, Emily A. Alonzo, Miguel A. Iglesias, Kelly-Shaye Patero, Juan J. Lopez, Ao Yun
Zhang, Bernd Zechmann, Noah E. Cook, Mona S. Minkara, Cary A. Supalo, Hoby B. Wedler, Matthew J. Guberman-
Pfeffer, and Bryan F. Shaw. Data for all: Tactile graphics that light up with picture-perfect resolution. Science Advances,
8(33):eabq2640, 2022.

[57] Lawrence Smith and Andrew Schulz. WhiskerAnalyses: A workflow for analyzing whiskers under various loading scenarios

using finite element analysis, 2025.

16

