From Radiation Dose to Cellular Dynamics: A Discrete Model for Simulating Cancer
Therapy

Mirko Bagnarol,1, ∗ Gianluca Lattanzi,2, † Jan ˚Astr¨om,3, ‡ and Mikko Karttunen4, 5, §
1The Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel
2Department of Physics, University of Trento and INFN-TIFPA,
Trento Institute for Fundamental Physics and Applications, Via Sommarive 14, Povo (TN) 38123, Italy
3CSC Scientific Computing Ltd, K¨agelstranden 14, 02150 Esbo, Finland
4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Western University,
1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7
5Department of Chemistry, Western University, 1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5B7
(Dated: April 14, 2025)

Radiation therapy is one of the most common cancer treatments, and dose optimization and
targeting of radiation are crucial since both cancerous and healthy cells are affected. Different
mathematical and computational approaches have been developed for this task. The most common
mathematical approach, dating back to the late 1970’s, is the linear-quadratic (LQ) model for
the survival probability given the radiation dose. Most simulation models consider tissue as a
continuum rather than consisting of discrete cells. While reasonable for large scale models, e.g., for
human organs, any cellular scale effects become, by necessity, neglected. They do, however, influence
growth, morphology, and metastasis of tumors. Here, we propose a method for modeling the effect of
radiation on cells based on the mechanobiological CellSim3D simulation model for growth, division,
and proliferation of cells. To model the effect of a radiation beam, we incorporate a Monte Carlo
procedure into CellSim3D with the LQ model by introducing a survival probability at each beam
delivery. Effective removal of dead cells by phagocytosis was also implemented. Systems with two
types of cells were simulated: stiff slowly proliferating healthy cells and soft rapidly proliferating
cancer cells. For model verification, the results were compared to prostate cancer (PC-3 cell line)
data for different doses and we found good agreement.
In addition, we simulated proliferating
systems and analyzed the probability density of the contact forces. We determined the state of the
system with respect to the jamming transition and found very good agreement with experiments.

I.

INTRODUCTION

According to the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), cancer was the second most common
cause of death responsible for 21.9% and 20.7% of deaths
of males and females, respectively, in 2017 [1, 2]. It has
been estimated that as many as 70% of cancer patients
receive radiotherapy either as the main treatment or in
combination with others [3]. Radiation treatment is par-
ticularly effective in breast and prostate cancers, and ac-
cording to Bryant et al. [4], 40% of breast and 23% of
prostate cancer survivors received radiation treatment.

Radiotherapy can be described as a treatment with
the aim to dysfunctionalize cancer cell DNA by dam-
aging it by irradiation of targeted high-energy beam of,
e.g., x-rays, protons or electrons. Radiation is not se-
lective and also damages healthy cells and their DNA,
and thus may, in addition to immediate side effects, have
side effects that take long times to be manifest. Due to
the above reasons, optimization of spatial accuracy, dose
and treatment frequency are critical for success. Reviews
of the perspectives and history of radiotherapy are pro-
vided, for example, by Bernier et al. [5], Connell and

∗ mirko.bagnarol@mail.huji.ac.il
† gianluca.lattanzi@unitn.it
‡ jan.astrom@csc.fi
§ mkarttu@uwo.ca

Hellman [6], and Streffer and Herrmann [7]. Different
approaches to modeling radiotherapy are provided, e.g.,
Jones and Dale [8].

There are different approaches to treatment planning
algorithms. They are typically divided into correction-
based and model-based, the latter being generally more
accurate [9, 10]. Difficulties include, for example, inho-
mogeneous tissue, fractonation of dose, over-expression of
self-repair mechanisms in cancer cells and cell migration.
One further issue is that most models treat the tissue
as a continuum rather than consisting of cells of discrete
sizes and varying mechanical properties. It has recently
been shown that the local mechanical stress landscape
has a strong influence on cell migration, and that target-
ing mechanical properties may provide a new pathway to
cancer treatment [11].

Some of the current modeling approaches include
agent-based ones [12] which may offer a new and adapt-
able way for modeling; although not specific to radiother-
apy, many of the current models for cancer are discussed
in the editorial by Enderling and Rejniak [13] and other
articles in that same special issue. Other reviews dis-
cussing radiotherapy related matters are provided, e.g.,
by Marcu and Harriss-Phillips [14], and D’Andrea et
al. [15] As the reviews show, discreteness of cells is very
rarely accounted for in radiotherapy modeling. One of
the models in that direction is the one by Bobadilla et
al. [16] where cells are differentiated according to whether

5
2
0
2

r
p
A
1
1

]
h
p
-
o
i
b
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
9
9
4
8
0
.
4
0
5
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
they have received radiation therapy or not. Concep-
tually, we combine different levels of modeling using a
mechanobiological cell model together with the contin-
uum LQ model. This is in the same sprit as the work of
Liu et al. [17], who combined radiation transport using
the Geant4 framework, and a cell simulation platform
called CompuCell3D.

The aim of this paper is to develop a radiotherapy
model based on discrete cells with heterogeneous prop-
erties, each capable of responding to changes in its lo-
cal environment. To this end, we used the CellSim3D
model [18] as the basis, and integrated features of an
external radiation beam by combining it with a Monte
Carlo process simulation and the LQ approach. Using
CellSim3D as the basis also provides an easily expand-
able tool beyond LQ. It is important to note that the
current implementation assumes a spatially uniform or
photon-based radiation field, which aligns with standard
clinical photon therapies. Extending this framework to
account for more complex radiation types, such as high-
energy protons or heavier ions, remains an open and tech-
nically challenging problem. Preliminary studies in this
direction exist [19, 20], particularly for high-energy pro-
tons where the biological effects tend to resemble those
of photons under certain conditions. Nonetheless, ac-
curately modeling the stochastic and spatially heteroge-
neous energy deposition characteristic of particle thera-
pies would require significant advancements in both phys-
ical modeling and biological response integration, and
represents a promising avenue for future work.

II. METHODS

A. CellSim3D and inclusion of radiation beam

The CellSim3D [18] model and software for cell di-
vision was used as the starting point. CellSim3D is an
open source software for mechanobiological simulations
of cells populations [22]. We omit the model details here
as they have been described in detail in several prior pub-
lications and since the code and model are freely avail-
able [18, 23, 24]; in particular, Supplemental Material
provided in Ref. [24] has a very detailed description of
the forces and interactions in the model.

In brief, CellSim3D is GPU accelerated and able
to routinely handle 100,000’s of cells in 3-dimensions
on a regular desktop computer equipped with standard
NVidia graphics cards (a wide range has been tested as
reported in Ref. [18]). The detailed derivation of the
model and a description of the software can be found in
Ref. [18] while the mapping between physical and model
parameters is provided in Ref. [25]. The parameters used
in this work are listed in Table 1 of Ref. [18] and will
not be rewritten here. The model includes cell-cell adhe-
sion as well as cell-cell and cell-medium friction, cell mi-
gration, cell division, and easily changeable elastic prop-
erties. Here, we have amended the original model by

2

adding 1) the effect of a generic therapeutic radiation
beam, 2) effective phagocytosis, and 3) the capability of
simulating more than one cell type (here, healthy and
cancer cells were used).

The effect of the radiation beam is implemented as a
random process: it acts by picking a random number ξn
drawn for each cell. This number is then compared with
the death probability Dn. If ξn < Dn the nth cells dies
and cannot reproduce anymore. Other properties are left
unchanged. This is essentially a simple Monte Carlo step.

B. Linear-Quadratic (LQ) model

The death probability (Dn) is taken from the Linear-
Quadratic (LQ) model that was first introduced in the
1970’s [26–28]. The LQ model remains the most fre-
quently used one [8, 29–33], and it is typically considered
to work for doses in the range of 2-15 Gy. It assumes that
the survival probability of a cell can be expressed as

S(D) = e−(αD+βD2),

(1)

where D is the dose delivered by the beam, while α
([α] = Gy−1) and β ([β] = Gy−2), called survival pa-
rameters, describe the radiosensitivity of the tissue. The
larger these parameters, the more sensitive the cells are
to radiation [34]. The parameter α is considered to model
a single-track process meaning that the cellular DNA is
damaged in a single radiation event. The parameter β
describes a situation of a two-track process in which the
DNA is damaged by two separate radiation hits. Thus,
the ratio α/β is an important characteristic of the model,
providing the relative importance of single and double
events.

The parameters α and β are experimentally accessi-
ble (albeit there can be important differences between
in vitro measurements and in vivo outcomes) and they
both depend on the nature of the beam and the target
tissue. The rationale for Eq. 1 is that it is a mecha-
nistic model describing radiation damage to the DNA
caused by two different types of processes. More com-
plex approximations for S(D), including those based on
the above LQ model, Lea-Catcheside factors, or exten-
sions of the LQ model to low and high dosages are not
considered here, but they can be easily implemented in
the code. For generalizations of the LQ model, see, e.g.,
Refs. [30, 31, 33, 35–37].

C. The action of the radiation beam

The action of the beam during a time step is instan-
taneous. Once the program determines the set of dying
cells, their status is switched from alive to dead during
the same time step. In real treatments, a single dose de-
livery usually lasts from 10 to 30 minutes, and thus the
instantaneous action may seem as a harsh approximation.

Simulation

Total # of steps (tend) Write frequency (∆twrite) Box side Beam Dose [Gy] α [Gy−1] β [Gy−2]

3

Prostate

7.25·105

2.5·104

330

Present

Force distribution

5.5·105

2·104

Absent

Present

Absent

Present

47

500

3
6
9
15
20
3
6
9
15
20
3
6
9
15
20
0
0.2333
0.4712
0.7792
0
0.2333
0.4712
0.7792

0.064

0.0167

0.241

0.067

0.487

0.055

1

1

TABLE I. The main simulation parameters: tend defines the total number of time steps and ∆twrite is the frequency for saving
data. The box side is given in the natural length scale of the system, which is set by the division volume Vdiv. Considering
HeLa cells [21], Vdiv of the order of unity corresponds to a length scale of 10 µm. The dose D and the parameters α and β
describe the action of the beam and the radiation resistance of the tissue according to Eq. (1).

This is, however, not the case due to time scales. In par-
ticular, the time unit in CellSim3D is determined by
cellular growth [18]. The program saves the state of the
system in the output file once every twrite steps, where
twrite, namely the output frame frequency, is a number
chosen by the user. Therefore, if the time interval be-
tween two successive frames reflects a period longer than
30 minutes, the beam can be considered as instantaneous.
In our simulations, the life cycle of a cancerous cell
defined from the newborn state and ending with division,
lasts less than 1,500 integration steps. In real time scales,
the cell cycle of a human cancerous cell has a duration of
about 24-72 hours, mitosis taking about 1 hour, setting
one single frame to be in that range. Therefore, since one
frame stands for a period longer than any dose delivery,
cell death can be thought as instantaneous.

In reality, dead cells undergo phagocytosis [38]. We
modeled this process as follows: when phagocytosis is
activated, the program progressively lowers the internal
pressure of the dead cells, until the threshold defined by
the user is reached. The rationale is that by decreas-
ing the volume of the dead cells they become very soft
and flexible, and free up space for the live cells to pro-
liferate. The effect of this is essentially the same as the
full removal of the dead cells but without the compu-
tational complexity required by restoring the topology
of the system and neighbor tables. Phagocytosis is, in
general, much faster than cellular reproduction [38] and
hence the shrinking rate for the dead cells is set to be ten

times the growth rate of alive cells. The factor of ten is
arbitrary but crucial (although its value can be changed
if/when needed): while the unit of time for the simula-
tion is determined by the cell cycle [25], it is important
to keep the events that occur within a single simulation
in the right order.

In the current approach, two different cell types are
present simultaneously. The first cell type represents
healthy and the second one cancerous cells; we note that
the type of cells is not limited to two, but can be var-
ied as necessary. The two types of cells are identical in
all parameters but Young’s modulus, which describes the
cell stiffness; cancer cells are typically considered to be
softer than healthy cells [39]. Cells with a higher Young’s
modulus are less prone to deformation and therefore grow
slowly when compared to softer cells. Slower growth re-
sults in slower division, which mirrors the well-known fact
that cancer cells proliferate faster than healthy ones [40].
In prior studies this approach has been successfully ap-
plied to study tumor growth in epithelial tissues [41].

III. RESULTS

The CellSim3D[18] model

for mechanobiological
studies of growth, division and proliferation of cells has
been successfully validated against experimental data for
the mitotic index and packing of epithelial cells [42], and
it has been used to study tissue growth under differ-

4

System a for alive cells a for dead cells x0 for alive cells x0 for dead cells % of alive cells

Packed

Open

−0.215 ± 0.007
−0.42 ± 0.01
−0.52 ± 0.03
−0.81 ± 0.02
−0.92 ± 0.02
−1.18 ± 0.03
−1.21 ± 0.04
−1.59 ± 0.05

-
−0.63 ± 0.07
−0.85 ± 0.06
−0.88 ± 0.04
-
−2.1 ± 0.3
−2.4 ± 0.1
−2.5 ± 0.1

−13.1 ± 0.9
−3.8 ± 0.4
−2.42 ± 0.4
−0.07 ± 0.01
−0.3 ± 0.1
0.43 ± 0.07
0.5 ± 0.1
0.44 ± 0.05

-
−3.2 ± 0.9
−1.4 ± 0.4
−1.2 ± 0.3
-
0.0 ± 0.3
0.5 ± 0.1
0.44 ± 0.09

100
78.8
60
38.7
100
80.3
60.9
39.5

TABLE II. Parameters for the exponential fits, a and x0 in Eq. 3. The tails for the probability densities of contact forces were
fitted by an exponential, Eq. 3. We report here the parameters for each simulation both in the case of fixed volume (Packed )
and open growth (Open), and for four different dead-alive final ratios. There are no dead cells in the first row of each block
since the beam was turned off (see the parameters in Table I).

parisons were made with published experimental results
for radiation (photon) treatment for the human prostate
cancer PC-3 cell line [46]. The second setup was aimed at
the investigation of the force distribution in the system
for a broad range of final states, varying the percentage
of alive cells and the size of the box. We found good
agreement despite the varying experimental setups. The
main parameters of the simulations described in the next
sections are summed up in Table I. We will discuss these
validations in the next two sections.

A. Contact force probability density

Eight different simulations were executed using differ-
ent sizes of the simulation box, and percentage of dead
cells at the final step. The spatial configurations are la-
beled as open in the case of an infinite box with open
boundaries and packed in the case of a rigid box filled
at the level of more than 80% at the final step of the
simulation (confluence or close to confluence). The per-
centages of alive cells at the end of the simulation were,
respectively, 100% (beam absent), 80%, 60% and 40%.
We reserved, in each simulation, 6% of the time steps for
the system to relax after radiation delivery. Up to 60,000
cells were simulated in each case.

It has been shown that near the jamming transition the
probability density of the inter-particle forces P (f ) de-
cays nearly exponentially at large forces; the exponential
tail is a signature of disorder and mechanical frustration.
We observed that, as the packing density is increased,
the tail of the distribution crosses over to a Gaussian in-
dicating a more uniform force distribution. This is in line
with previous experimental and simulation studies [44].
We extracted the probability density of the contact
forces P (f ). The force f is normalized by the mode of
the distribution, such that the peak is at f = 1. The
probability densities are renormalized after cutting off
the last 1% of the distribution, since the points in that
range have a very low statistics and represent, in the
case of alive cells, newborns which have anomalously high
values caused by the conformation after the division al-

FIG. 1. Comparison of the normalized probability density of
dead cells in the simulations with a beam delivery. Fitting
parameters for the Gaussian (Eq. 2) and exponential (Eq. 3)
distribution are shown in Tables II and III. D1, D2 and D3 are
the fractions of dead cells in the final frame of the simulation,
and have the values D1 ≈ 20%, D2 ≈ 40% and D3 ≈ 60%.

ent conditions [24, 43]. The addition of new features in
CellSim3D requires two different types of validations.
First, we compared the packing properties of cells to
those obtained from experiments [44] for elastic spheres
and found very good agreement. We compared also the
contact forces and their distributions, in particular with
respect to the jamming transition. The distribution of
forces displays an exponential tail, in agreement with
experimental data from elastic shells [44]. There are
only very few force measurements in cellular systems, but
Trepat et al. [45] measured traction distributions using
Madin-Darby canine kidney cells, finding that the peak
of the distribution can be well approximated by a Gaus-
sian, while the tail is an exponential, in excellent agree-
ment with our model predictions. This will be discussed
in detail in Section III A 1.

A second validation was performed with respect to
radiation treatment, with two simulation setups. The
first setup was aimed at testing the radiation beam in a
common pathology such as prostate tumor: direct com-

gorithm. We fitted the peak of the distribution with a
Gaussian function

g(A, x0, σ; x) = Ae− (x−x0 )2

2σ2

and the tail with an exponential function

f (x; a, x0) = ea(x−x0)

(2)

(3)

in order to to determine the stress transfer and the state
of the system with respect to the point of the jamming
transition. In Eqs. 2 and 3 above, A and a are the re-
spective amplitudes, x0 the position of the peak and σ
the width of the Gaussian.

1. Analysis of the fit

The parameter values from fitting to an exponential,
Eq. 3, and the survival percentages are shown in Ta-
ble II, and the probability densities of the dead cells in
the six simulations with the beam active are shown in
Fig. 1. Table II shows interesting features: First, the
steepness of the tails of the distributions is higher in the
open systems than in the packed ones. This is expected,
since the packed system is characterized by less space
per particle, thus causing a more abundant population
of stronger forces. The same steepness pattern is found
when comparing dead and alive cells, in both spatial con-
figurations. There are two interpretations:

• The shrinking of the dead cells,

i.e., mimicking
phagocytosis, was not complete. Therefore, the
majority of the dead cells have some free space
around them and are not completely packed with
their neighbors, resulting in softer contact and
lower peak forces.

• Implementation of cell shrinking: As a cell gains in-
ternal pressure when growing, it loses internal pres-
sure when shrinking. Cells whose internal pressure
is close to Pdead, the lower threshold, have a weaker
pressure force ⃗F P , which points from the center of
mass outward, and, in principle, prevents the cell
from folding. Cells with lower pressure are more
prone to becoming concave in some areas, decreas-
ing the contact area with the neighbors, and hence
the total contact force on the cell.

We also observed that the relative errors of the dead
cells are higher than those of alive cells. Moreover, the
relative errors of the open space simulations are higher
than those in the packed ones. These facts reflect the
abundance of statistics at higher forces.
In fact, the
shorter the sample in the tail, the higher the probability
for some bins of the histogram to contain only one or
two points. The latter ones flatten the tail and augment
the spread. This feature does not depend on the binning
of the histogram and can be explained exactly as in the
previous paragraph.

5

Parameter Packed dead Open dead
0.107 ± 0.005
0.26 ± 0.02
3.12 ± 0.07
1.39 ± 0.06
1.011 ± 0.004
0.98 ± 0.02

σ
A
x0

TABLE III. Parameters for the Gaussian fit (Eq. 2) for dead
cells both in the case of fixed volume (Packed ) and open
growth (Open), in the simulation with a final percentage of
40% dead cells. σ, representing the width of the Gaussian, is
related to the stress transfer and describes the status of our
system with respect to the jamming transition. x0 is forced
to be ≈ 1 since the distributions are normalized to have the
peak at f = 1. We report the set of parameters fitted only for
one dose (0.4712 Gy, determining a final dead to total cells
ratio of 40%) since variations in the fit for other simulations
with different final ratios are negligible and well within the
statistics.

The parameter values from fitting to a Gaussian, Eq. 2,
are shown in Table III. We notice that in the case of fixed
volume (packed) spatial configuration, the peak is more
than twice wider than in the case of free growth (open
boundary) having σpacked = 0.26 ± 0.02 and σopen =
0.107 ± 0.005, respectively. This is easily explained by
the fact that in a free growth environment only few cells
at the very core feel strong forces from their neighbors,
while cells at the border proliferate freely and tend to
expand the system and reduce contacts with their neigh-
bors rather than compress the system. This is not pos-
sible when the system has filled all the available volume,
and higher forces are experienced throughout the system.
This fact is also expressed in the statistical error of σ.

The exponential tails and the widths of the Gaussians
provide insight on the state of the system with respect
to the jamming transition. When the system has little to
no volume available, cell mobility decreases dramatically,
and the cells stick together forming a compact granular
tissue. In this case, the force distribution has a long ex-
ponential tail with a very marked slope difference from
the initial, Gaussian peak. This is evident in the force
distribution of dead cells in the packed configuration in
Fig. 1. A similar result can be found in Fig. 7b of [41],
where the authors showed the force distribution of a sys-
tem of bidimensional cells with high friction and no free
volume available. On the other hand, when the system
has room to expand at its borders and little free space
in its core due to the deflation of dead cells, the expo-
nential tail is still present but way steeper and almost
contiguous to the Gaussian peak. This is the case of the
dead cells in the open space configuration in Fig. 1. The
system is still dense in its core, but cell mobility is still
considerable and clusters of cells can move. This is again
in agreement with [41], where the authors show in their
Fig. 7a the same system but with null friction. Even
if the volume available is still zero, the absence of fric-
tion facilitates independent cell movement and keeps the
system at the jamming threshold.

Label α [Gy]−1 β [Gy]−2
0.064
αβ-1
0.241
αβ-2
0.487
αβ-3

0.0167 Deweese et al. [47]
0.067
0.055

Algan et al. [48]
Leith et al. [49]

Data from

TABLE IV. Survival parameters from other studies, and used
in the current simulations. The parameters α and β describe
the survival probability of a cell hit by a beam of dose D
according to Eq. 1.

2. Shape of the distributions

Figure 1 shows that the peaks of the probability dis-
tributions for the packed configuration are, in general,
lower than the ones of the free distribution. This is sim-
ply caused by the longer tail, and the normalization of the
distributions. Since the domain is longer and the area is
fixed to unity, the peak at the mode ¯f must be lower. We
notice that both tails have an exponential shape, but the
cells that are in open space exhibit a steeper decay. Due
to the normalization of the probability density, the cells
in with the open boundary conditions are more peaked
around the maximum. The difference in peak height is
also found when comparing the force probability distri-
butions of alive and dead cells in the packed vs. open
graphs, as shown in Fig. 1. The shapes of the curves of
cells from the same spatial configuration are basically the
same.

3. Comparison with experimental data

We now compare our results with the experimental
data of Jose et al. [44]. They prepared thousands of
micron-sized elastic shells suspended in a solvent, ap-
plied different loads to the samples, and extracted the
force distribution. They found an initial peak and a long
exponential tail. The most impressive similarities are
found between our distributions in the packed configura-
tion in Fig. 1, and their curves at low fractions of volume
occupied by grain. This is expected, since the system in
our simulation does not fill completely the volume at its
disposal, but it is still compressed in five out of six sides
of the cubic box.

There are, however, two notable differences. The first
is that in our work, the gradient between the peak and
the initial value, at f ≈ 0, is high, ranging from two to
three orders of magnitude. In their case, the difference
is small and, in some curves, displays a plateau. Their
abundance of low forces is explained by the fact that,
in the small force domain, they compute the forces with
a linear equation, starting from the deformation of the
grain. They observe a plateau when the fraction of space
occupied by the grains is lower than 0.7. The hard sphere
packing theorem [50] states that the maximum volume
occupied by hard spheres packed in space is π
≈ 0.74,
√
2
3
while the limit for random packing is 0.637 [51].

6

Therefore, since the density of soft grains in Ref. [44]
is even smaller than the limit density of hard grains, and
it is comparable with the threshold of randomly packed
hard spheres, multiple soft grains in their experiment
must have no deformation at all, giving abundance of
points at low force. On the other hand, in our case, cells
proliferate from an initial core, and any cell at the border
of the system has at least one neighbor with which it is
in contact, thus yielding a force contribution close to the
mean and far from zero.

The second difference to the distributions in Ref. [44] is
the fact that they measured forces up to 4 times the mean
force, while we detected values that were 7 times higher
than our peak value ¯f (which is proximal to the mean and
set to unity in Fig. 1). This fact, however, is explained
by how the forces act In a packed configuration, neighbor
cells are constantly pushed one against the other, and a
linear repulsion ⃗F R arises. Since the force has no upper
bound, the repulsion force can become arbitrarily large,
and in close packing it can easily reach high values.

They also observed a Gaussian behavior away from the
jamming point by augmenting the load, and therefore the
fraction of space occupied by the grains. Although our
open boundary simulations also show a behavior similar
to a Gaussian right after the peak, the setup is too dif-
ferent to be reliable for a comparison, since there is no
load on our system, and the packing in the core of the
system is only due to cell-cell adhesion.

Trepat et al. [45] measured traction distributions in ca-
nine kidney cells. Although we cannot compare their re-
sults quantitatively – we have force distributions – quali-
tative features can be compared. The data and fits shown
in Fig. 1 are in excellent agreement with the traction data
of Trepat et al. [45] which also shows Gaussian peaks and
exponential tails.

B. Cell survival: the comparison with prostate
cancer data

Three data sets of survival parameters (α, β) were
extracted from the α/β ratios present in literature [55]
along with three data sets [52–54] on the dead-to-alive
ratios for the PC-3 cell line. In all cases radiation was
delivered by a photon beam with no fractionation. We
list the survival parameters in Table IV.

The survival parameters α and β do not depend on
the dose D, but only on the nature of the beam and the
structure of the tissue. However, these experimental val-
ues come from studies with different aims, namely the
impact of the over-expression of a specific gene or a spe-
cific protein on the radiosensitivity of the tissue. Hence,
these experimental data are influenced by external fac-
tors and the cell culture samples may also meet varying
experimental conditions due to specific preparations, as
listed below:

• In Kiprianou et al. [52] the influence of an over-
expression of a specific gene on radiosensitivity

7

FIG. 2. Percentage of surviving cells in our simulations
(dashed lines), labeled with their α and β parameters (Ta-
ble IV), and experimental data (solid lines) taken from Kipri-
anou et al. [52] (orange), Russell et al. [53] (magenta) and
Yun et al. [54] (olive green).

was carefully analyzed and compared with refer-
ence measurements performed on a pure PC-3 cul-
ture. Here, we used these unbiased reference data.

• Russell et al. [53] investigated the radiosensitivity
enhancement caused by the expression of a specific
protein. The study presents a control, in which the
sample was mixed with a specific concentration of
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) before irradiation. In
this work, we used these unbiased data.

• In the case of Yun et al. [54] the radiosensitivity
enhancement was caused by the lack of a protein.
Also in this case, we used the reference control,
where the irradiated sample presents an endoge-
nous level of the protein.

It is important to notice that, especially for improve-
ments and accuracy, although we have chosen unbiased
(or less biased) published data sets, differences in sam-
ple preparation, vector substance, and cell counting may
complicate any quantitative comparison.

The simulation results and the experimental data ex-
tracted from references are plotted in Fig. 2. As ex-
pected, quantitative agreement is mixed: our results are
mainly qualitative, since we collected parameters and val-
ues from previous studies having quite different experi-
mental conditions. Quantitative agreement is restored at
the tails of the distributions.

More specifically, we notice that the first set of pa-
rameters (blue curve in Fig. 2) slightly overestimates the
experimental set taken from Ref. [52] (orange curve) by a
maximum 11% at D = 6 Gy, while the difference becomes
lower than 8% in all other cases. The disagreement fur-
ther decreases toward the tail, as expected, since more

FIG. 3. Mass density projected along all the directions (zy-,
zx- and yx-planes) both at the beam hit (left panels) and at
the end (right panels)of the open boundary simulation with
60.9% of alive cells at the final step. Blue: alive cells, and red:
the dead cells. Proliferation tends to push the dead cells into
clusters. The units in the axis are expressed in the natural
units of the system (see Table I).

cells are killed by the increased dose. The second set
(cyan) and the experimental data taken from Ref. [53]
(magenta), on the other hand, display a very good agree-
ment, meaning that the measurements from Ref. [53] are
well described by the parameters fitted in [48]. This is
impressive, since the radiation is from a different source
(respectively, X- and γ-ray) and a vector substance was
added to the sample in the experimental setup, poten-
tially slightly altering its radiosensitivity. The last set
(black) describes a very sensitive tissue and the simula-
tion systematically underestimates the experimental data
taken from Ref. [54] (green).

In each simulation the final number of cells n0 was be-
tween 43, 000 and 45, 000, thus providing sufficient statis-
tics with 0.1% standard deviation for all points. The
experimental data were published without error bars, al-
though the authors reported that all points represented
mean values of at least three samples.

Figure 3 shows three spatial projections of the final
two frames of the force distribution with open boundary
configuration and with a 0.4712 Gy dose (see Table I).

The mass densities of alive cells are shown in blue and
those of the dead cells in red. Clusters, or islands, of
dead cells are clearly visible across the tumor after 2,000
steps of proliferation. The dead cells are pushed together
by the division of the alive cells, which occurs even in the
core of the system due to the free space releases by the
dead cells.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have proposed and analyzed a new tool for ra-
diation oncology simulations by representing the tissue
as a set of cells, rather than a continuum material, us-
ing the recently proposed CellSim3D mechanobiological
cell model. We implemented the effects of radiation beam
with a customizable dose, tissue sensitivity and fraction-
ation as a stochastic Monte Carlo process. In a first set
of runs, we measured the probability density P (f ) of the
inter-cellular forces, finding an excellent agreement with
experiments in many aspects, and some minor differences
due to the celluylar nature of the system. With these
measurements, we were able to determine the state of
the system with respect to the jamming transition, gives
information on how far the cells can move inside the tu-

[1] Leading causes of death in females, United States 2017

(2019), accessed: April 5, 2020.

[2] Leading causes of death in males, United States 2017

(2019), accessed: April 5, 2020.

[3] O. Blyuss,

L. Koriashkina,

and
R. Molchanov, Optimal placement
irradiation
sources in the planning of radiotherapy: Mathematical
models and methods of solving, Comput. Math. Methods
Med. 2015, 1 (2015).

E. Kiseleva,
of

[4] A. K. Bryant, M. P. Banegas, M. E. Martinez, L. K. Mell,
and J. D. Murphy, Trends in radiation therapy among
cancer survivors in the united states, 2000-2030, Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 26, 963 (2017).

[5] J. Bernier, E. J. Hall, and A. Giaccia, Radiation oncol-
ogy: a century of achievements, Nat. Rev. Cancer 4, 737
(2004).

[6] P. P. Connell and S. Hellman, Advances in radiotherapy
and implications for the next century: A historical per-
spective, Cancer Res. 69, 383 (2009).

[7] C. Streffer and T. Herrmannn, A century of development
in radiation biology. basic principles of targeted and ef-
ficient radiotherapy, Strahlenther. Onkol. 188 Suppl 3,
231 (2012).

[8] B. Jones and R. G. Dale, The evolution of practical radio-
biological modelling, Br. J. Radiol. 92, 20180097 (2019).
[9] W.-Z. Chen, Impact of dose calculation algorithm on ra-

diation therapy, World J. Radiol. 6, 874 (2014).

[10] Y. L. Woon, S. P. Heng, J. H. D. Wong, and N. M. Ung,
Comparison of selected dose calculation algorithms in ra-
diotherapy treatment planning for tissues with inhomo-
geneities, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 694, 012024 (2016).

8

mor. As a further proof of concept, we investigated the
effect of radiation on prostate tumor model, finding good
qualitative, but mixed quantitative agreement with ex-
perimental data. This is likely due to the varying ex-
perimental conditions present in literature. For further
development, the software can be made to include spa-
tial and temporal inhomogeneities for the dose and tis-
sue radiosensitivity as well as time dependence for, e.g.,
the dose rate. In addition, a more elaborated version of
the survival probability can be used in place of Eq. (1),
and cell migration can be used to simulate further dy-
namic effects of cancers, such as metastasis. Such exten-
sions would allow for more quantitative simulations of
fractionated dose, inhomogeneous irradiation protocols,
or even an inhomogeneous radiosensitivity of the tissue,
and provide useful comparisons with experiments or even
predictions for actual treatments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Francesco Cordoni for a critical reading of
the manuscript. MK thanks the Discovery and Canada
Research Chairs Programs of the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for
financial support.

[11] D. T. Tambe, C. C. Hardin, T. E. Angelini, K. Rajen-
dran, C. Y. Park, X. Serra-Picamal, E. H. Zhou, M. H.
Zaman, J. P. Butler, D. A. Weitz, J. J. Fredberg, and
X. Trepat, Collective cell guidance by cooperative inter-
cellular forces, Nat. Mat. 10, 469 (2011).

[12] A. Jalalimanesh, H. S. Haghighi, A. Ahmadi, and
M. Soltani, Simulation-based optimization of radiother-
apy: Agent-based modeling and reinforcement learning,
Math. Comput. Simul. 133, 235 (2017).

[13] H. Enderling and K. A. Rejniak, Simulating cancer:
Computational models in oncology, Front. Oncol. 3, 233
(2013).

[14] L. G. Marcu and W. M. Harriss-Phillips, In silico mod-
elling of treatment-induced tumour cell kill: develop-
ments and advances, Comput. Math. Methods Med.
2012, 960256 (2012).

[15] M. D’Andrea, M. Benassi, and L. Strigari, Model-
ing radiotherapy induced normal tissue complications:
An overview beyond phenomenological models, Comput.
Math. Methods Med. 2016, 2796186 (2016).

[16] A. V. P. Bobadilla, P. K. Maini, and H. Byrne, A stochas-
tic model for tumour control probability that accounts for
repair from sublethal damage, Math. Med. Biol. 35, 181
(2017).

[17] R. Liu, K. A. Higley, M. H. Swat, M. A. J. Chaplain,
G. G. Powathil, and J. A. Glazier, Development of a
coupled simulation toolkit for computational radiation
biology based on Geant4 and CompuCell3D, Phys. Med.
Biol. 66, 045026 (2021).

[18] P. Madhikar, J. ˚Astr¨om, J. Westerholm, and M. Kart-
tunen, CellSim3D: GPU accelerated software for simula-

tions of cellular growth and division in three dimensions,
Comp. Phys. Comm. 232, 206 (2018).

[19] N. Cogno, R. Bauer, and M. Durante, Mechanistic model
of radiotherapy-induced lung fibrosis using coupled 3d
agent-based and monte carlo simulations, Commun. Med.
4, 023129 (2024).

[20] O. R. Garc`ıa Garc`ıa, R. Ortiz, E. Moreno-Barbosa, N. D-
Kondo, B. Faddegon, and J. Ramos-M´endez, TOPAS-
Tissue: A framework for the simulation of the biological
response to ionizing radiation at the multi-cellular level,
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 25, 10061 (2024).

[21] H. W. Jones, Record of the first physician to see Henri-
etta Lacks at the Johns Hopkins Hospital: history of the
beginning of the HeLa cell line, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol.
176, s227 (1997).

[22] Open source: https://github.com/softsimu/cellsim3d.
[23] P. Madhikar, J. ˚Astr¨om, B. Baumeier, and M. Karttunen,
Jamming and force distribution in growing epithelial tis-
sue, Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 023129 (2021).

[24] M. Mazarei, J. ˚Astr¨om, J. Westerholm, and M. Kart-
tunen, In silico testing of the universality of epithelial
tissue growth, Phys. Rev. E 106, L062402 (2022).
[25] A. Mkrtchyan, J. A. ˚Astr¨om, and M. Karttunen, A new
model for cell division and migration with spontaneous
topology changes, Soft Matter 10, 4332 (2014).

[26] A. M. Kellerer and H. D. Rossi, Theory of dual radiation
action, Curr. Top. Radiat. Res. Quart. 8, 85 (1972).
[27] K. H. Chadwick and H. P. Leenhouts, A molecular theory

of cell survival, Phys. Med. Biol. 18, 78 (1973).

[28] A. M. Kellerer and H. H. Rossi, A generalized formulation
of dual radiation action, Radiat. Res. 75, 471 (1978).
[29] R. G. Dale, The application of the linear-quadratic dose-
effect equation to fractionated and protracted radiother-
apy, Br. J. Radiol. 58, 515 (1985).

[30] S. F. C. O’Rourke, H. McAneney, and T. Hillen, Lin-
ear quadratic and tumour control probability modelling
in external beam radiotherapy, J. Math. Biol. 58, 799
(2008).

[31] D. J. Brenner, The linear-quadratic model is an appro-
priate methodology for determining isoeffective doses at
large doses per fraction, Sem. Radiat. Oncol. 18, 234
(2008).

[32] A. Santiago, S. Barczyk, U. Jelen, R. Engenhart-Cabillic,
and A. Wittig, Challenges in radiobiological modeling:
can we decide between LQ and LQ-l models based on
reviewed clinical NSCLC treatment outcome data?, Ra-
diat. Oncol. 11, 67 (2016).

[33] C. M. van Leeuwen, A. L. Oei, J. Crezee, A. Bel, N. A. P.
Franken, L. J. A. Stalpers, and H. P. Kok, The alfa and
beta of tumours: a review of parameters of the linear-
quadratic model, derived from clinical radiotherapy stud-
ies, Radiat. Oncol. 13, 96 (2018).

[34] S. J. McMahon, The linear quadratic model: usage, inter-
pretation and challenges, Phys. Med. Biol. 64, 01TR01
(2018).

[35] F. Cordoni, M. Missiaggia, A. Attili, S. M. Welford,
E. Scifoni, and C. La Tessa, Generalized stochastic mi-
crodosimetric model: The main formulation, Phys. Rev.
E 103, 012412 (2021).

[36] F. G. Cordoni, M. Missiaggia, E. Scifoni, and C. La Tessa,
Cell survival computation via the generalized stochastic
microdosimetric model (GSM2); Part I: The theoretical
framework, Radiat. Res. 197, 218 (2022).

9

[37] M. Missiaggia, F. G. Cordoni, E. Scifoni, and C. L. Tessa,
Cell survival computation via the generalized stochastic
microdosimetric model (GSM2); Part II: Numerical re-
sults, Radiat. Res. 201, 104 (2024).

[38] A. Aderem and D. M. Underhill, Mechanism of phago-
cytosis in macrophages, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 17, 593
(1999).

[39] C. Alibert, B. Goud, and J.-B. Manneville, Are Cancer
Cells Really Softer than Normal Cells?, Biol. Cell 109,
167 (2017).

[40] D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, Hallmarks of cancer:

The next generation, Cell 144, 646 (2011).

[41] P. Madhikar, J. ˚Astr¨om, B. Baumeier, and M. Karttunen,
Jamming and force distribution in growing epithelial tis-
sue, Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 023129 (2021).

[42] P. Madhikar, J. ˚Astr¨om, J. Westerholm, B. Baumeier,
and M. Karttunen, Coarse-grained modeling of cell di-
vision in 3d: influence of density, medium viscosity, and
inter-membrane friction on cell growth and nearest neigh-
bor distribution, Soft Mat. 18, 150 (2020).

[43] M. Mazarei, J. ˚Astr¨om, J. Westerholm, and M. Kart-
tunen, Effect of substrate heterogeneity and topology on
epithelial tissue growth dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 108,
054405 (2023).

[44] J. Jose, A. van Blaaderen, and A. Imhof, Random three-
dimensional jammed packings of elastic shells acting as
force sensors, Phys. Rev. E 93, 062901 (2016).

[45] X. Trepat, M. R. Wasserman, T. E. Angelini, E. Millet,
D. A. Weitz, J. P. Butler, and J. J. Fredberg, Physical
forces during collective cell migration, Nat. Phys. 5, 426
(2009).

[46] M. E. Kaighn, K. S. Narayan, Y. Ohnuki, J. F. Lechner,
and L. W. Jones, Establishment and characterization of a
human prostatic carcinoma cell line (PC-3), Invest. Urol.
17, 16 (1979).

[47] T. L. Deweese, J. M. Shipman, L. E. Dillehay, and W. G.
Nelson, Sensitivity of human prostatic carcinoma cell
lines to low dose rate radiation exposure, J. Urol. 159,
591 (1998).

[48] O. Algan, C. C. Stobbe, A. M. Helt, G. E. Hanks,
and J. D. Chapman, Radiation inactivation of human
prostate cancer cells: the role of apoptosis, Radiat. Res.
146, 267 (1996).

[49] J. T. Leith, L. Quaranto, G. Padfield, S. Michelson, and
A. Hercbergs, Radiobiological studies of pc-3 and du-145
human prostate cancer cells: x-ray sensitivity in vitro
and hypoxic fractions of xenografted tumors in vivo, Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 25, 283 (1993).

[50] C. Cadart, E. Zlotek-Zlotkiewicz, M. Le Berre, M. Piel,
and H. K. Matthews, Exploring the function of cell shape
and size during mitosis, Dev. Cell 29, 159 (2014).
[51] G. D. Scott and D. M. Kilgour, The density of random
close packing of spheres, J. Phys. D 2, 863 (1969).
[52] D. B. N. Kiprianou, E. D. King and J. G. Rhee, bcl-2
over-expression delays radiation-indeuces apoptosis with-
out affecting the clonogenic survival of human prostate
cancer cells, Int. J. Cancer 70, 341–348 (1997).

[53] J. S. Russell, W. Burgan, K. A. Oswald, K. Camphausen,
and P. J. Tofilon, Enhanced cell killing induced by the
combination of radiation and the heat shock protein 90
inhibitor 17-allylamino-17- demethoxygeldanamycin: a
multitarget approach to radiosensitization, Clin. Cancer
Res. 9, 3749 (2003).

[54] E.-J. Yun, C.-J. Lin, A. Dang, E. Hernandez, J. Guo,
W.-M. Chen, J. Allison, N. Kim, P. Kapur, J. Brugaro-
las, K. Wu, D. He, C.-H. Lai, H. Lin, D. Saha, S. T.
Baek, B. P. Chen, and J.-T. Hsieh, Downregulation of
human dab2ip gene expression in prostate cancer cells
results in resistance to ionizing radiation, Cancer Res.

70, 2829–2839 (2003).

[55] D. J. Carlson, R. D. Stewart, X. A. Li, K. Jennings, J. Z.
Wang, and M. Guerrero, Comparison of in vitro and in
vivo α/β ratios for prostate cancer, Phys. Med. Biol. 49,
4477–4491 (2004).

10

