From Radiation Dose to Cellular Dynamics: A Discrete Model for Simulating Cancer Therapy Mirko Bagnarol,1, ∗ Gianluca Lattanzi,2, † Jan ˚Astr¨om,3, ‡ and Mikko Karttunen4, 5, § 1The Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel 2Department of Physics, University of Trento and INFN-TIFPA, Trento Institute for Fundamental Physics and Applications, Via Sommarive 14, Povo (TN) 38123, Italy 3CSC Scientific Computing Ltd, K¨agelstranden 14, 02150 Esbo, Finland 4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Western University, 1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7 5Department of Chemistry, Western University, 1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5B7 (Dated: April 14, 2025) Radiation therapy is one of the most common cancer treatments, and dose optimization and targeting of radiation are crucial since both cancerous and healthy cells are affected. Different mathematical and computational approaches have been developed for this task. The most common mathematical approach, dating back to the late 1970’s, is the linear-quadratic (LQ) model for the survival probability given the radiation dose. Most simulation models consider tissue as a continuum rather than consisting of discrete cells. While reasonable for large scale models, e.g., for human organs, any cellular scale effects become, by necessity, neglected. They do, however, influence growth, morphology, and metastasis of tumors. Here, we propose a method for modeling the effect of radiation on cells based on the mechanobiological CellSim3D simulation model for growth, division, and proliferation of cells. To model the effect of a radiation beam, we incorporate a Monte Carlo procedure into CellSim3D with the LQ model by introducing a survival probability at each beam delivery. Effective removal of dead cells by phagocytosis was also implemented. Systems with two types of cells were simulated: stiff slowly proliferating healthy cells and soft rapidly proliferating cancer cells. For model verification, the results were compared to prostate cancer (PC-3 cell line) data for different doses and we found good agreement. In addition, we simulated proliferating systems and analyzed the probability density of the contact forces. We determined the state of the system with respect to the jamming transition and found very good agreement with experiments. I. INTRODUCTION According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), cancer was the second most common cause of death responsible for % and % of deaths of males and females, respectively, in 2017 [1, 2]. It has been estimated that as many as 70% of cancer patients receive radiotherapy either as the main treatment or in combination with others . Radiation treatment is par- ticularly effective in breast and prostate cancers, and ac- cording to Bryant et al. , 40% of breast and 23% of prostate cancer survivors received radiation treatment. Radiotherapy can be described as a treatment with the aim to dysfunctionalize cancer cell DNA by dam- aging it by irradiation of targeted high-energy beam of, e.g., x-rays, protons or electrons. Radiation is not se- lective and also damages healthy cells and their DNA, and thus may, in addition to immediate side effects, have side effects that take long times to be manifest. Due to the above reasons, optimization of spatial accuracy, dose and treatment frequency are critical for success. Reviews of the perspectives and history of radiotherapy are pro- vided, for example, by Bernier et al. , Connell and ∗ mirko.bagnarol@mail.huji.ac.il † gianluca.lattanzi@unitn.it ‡ jan.astrom@csc.fi § mkarttu@uwo.ca Hellman , and Streffer and Herrmann . Different approaches to modeling radiotherapy are provided, e.g., Jones and Dale . There are different approaches to treatment planning algorithms. They are typically divided into correction- based and model-based, the latter being generally more accurate [9, 10]. Difficulties include, for example, inho- mogeneous tissue, fractonation of dose, over-expression of self-repair mechanisms in cancer cells and cell migration. One further issue is that most models treat the tissue as a continuum rather than consisting of cells of discrete sizes and varying mechanical properties. It has recently been shown that the local mechanical stress landscape has a strong influence on cell migration, and that target- ing mechanical properties may provide a new pathway to cancer treatment . Some of the current modeling approaches include agent-based ones which may offer a new and adapt- able way for modeling; although not specific to radiother- apy, many of the current models for cancer are discussed in the editorial by Enderling and Rejniak and other articles in that same special issue. Other reviews dis- cussing radiotherapy related matters are provided, e.g., by Marcu and Harriss-Phillips , and D’Andrea et al. As the reviews show, discreteness of cells is very rarely accounted for in radiotherapy modeling. One of the models in that direction is the one by Bobadilla et al. where cells are differentiated according to whether 5 2 0 2 r p A 1 1 ] h p - o i b . s c i s y h p [ 1 v 9 9 4 8 0 . 4 0 5 2 : v i X r a they have received radiation therapy or not. Concep- tually, we combine different levels of modeling using a mechanobiological cell model together with the contin- uum LQ model. This is in the same sprit as the work of Liu et al. , who combined radiation transport using the Geant4 framework, and a cell simulation platform called CompuCell3D. The aim of this paper is to develop a radiotherapy model based on discrete cells with heterogeneous prop- erties, each capable of responding to changes in its lo- cal environment. To this end, we used the CellSim3D model as the basis, and integrated features of an external radiation beam by combining it with a Monte Carlo process simulation and the LQ approach. Using CellSim3D as the basis also provides an easily expand- able tool beyond LQ. It is important to note that the current implementation assumes a spatially uniform or photon-based radiation field, which aligns with standard clinical photon therapies. Extending this framework to account for more complex radiation types, such as high- energy protons or heavier ions, remains an open and tech- nically challenging problem. Preliminary studies in this direction exist [19, 20], particularly for high-energy pro- tons where the biological effects tend to resemble those of photons under certain conditions. Nonetheless, ac- curately modeling the stochastic and spatially heteroge- neous energy deposition characteristic of particle thera- pies would require significant advancements in both phys- ical modeling and biological response integration, and represents a promising avenue for future work. II. METHODS A. CellSim3D and inclusion of radiation beam The CellSim3D model and software for cell di- vision was used as the starting point. CellSim3D is an open source software for mechanobiological simulations of cells populations . We omit the model details here as they have been described in detail in several prior pub- lications and since the code and model are freely avail- able [18, 23, 24]; in particular, Supplemental Material provided in Ref. has a very detailed description of the forces and interactions in the model. In brief, CellSim3D is GPU accelerated and able to routinely handle 100,000’s of cells in 3-dimensions on a regular desktop computer equipped with standard NVidia graphics cards (a wide range has been tested as reported in Ref. ). The detailed derivation of the model and a description of the software can be found in Ref. while the mapping between physical and model parameters is provided in Ref. . The parameters used in this work are listed in of Ref. and will not be rewritten here. The model includes cell-cell adhe- sion as well as cell-cell and cell-medium friction, cell mi- gration, cell division, and easily changeable elastic prop- erties. Here, we have amended the original model by 2 adding 1) the effect of a generic therapeutic radiation beam, 2) effective phagocytosis, and 3) the capability of simulating more than one cell type (here, healthy and cancer cells were used). The effect of the radiation beam is implemented as a random process: it acts by picking a random number ξn drawn for each cell. This number is then compared with the death probability Dn. If ξn < Dn the nth cells dies and cannot reproduce anymore. Other properties are left unchanged. This is essentially a simple Monte Carlo step. B. Linear-Quadratic (LQ) model The death probability (Dn) is taken from the Linear- Quadratic (LQ) model that was first introduced in the 1970’s [26–28]. The LQ model remains the most fre- quently used one [8, 29–33], and it is typically considered to work for doses in the range of 2-15 Gy. It assumes that the survival probability of a cell can be expressed as S(D) = e−(αD+βD2), where D is the dose delivered by the beam, while α ([α] = Gy−1) and β ([β] = Gy−2), called survival pa- rameters, describe the radiosensitivity of the tissue. The larger these parameters, the more sensitive the cells are to radiation . The parameter α is considered to model a single-track process meaning that the cellular DNA is damaged in a single radiation event. The parameter β describes a situation of a two-track process in which the DNA is damaged by two separate radiation hits. Thus, the ratio α/β is an important characteristic of the model, providing the relative importance of single and double events. The parameters α and β are experimentally accessi- ble (albeit there can be important differences between in vitro measurements and in vivo outcomes) and they both depend on the nature of the beam and the target tissue. The rationale for Eq. 1 is that it is a mecha- nistic model describing radiation damage to the DNA caused by two different types of processes. More com- plex approximations for S(D), including those based on the above LQ model, Lea-Catcheside factors, or exten- sions of the LQ model to low and high dosages are not considered here, but they can be easily implemented in the code. For generalizations of the LQ model, see, e.g., Refs. [30, 31, 33, 35–37]. C. The action of the radiation beam The action of the beam during a time step is instan- taneous. Once the program determines the set of dying cells, their status is switched from alive to dead during the same time step. In real treatments, a single dose de- livery usually lasts from 10 to 30 minutes, and thus the instantaneous action may seem as a harsh approximation. Simulation Total # of steps (tend) Write frequency (∆twrite) Box side Beam Dose [Gy] α [Gy−1] β [Gy−2] 3 Prostate ·105 ·104 330 Present Force distribution ·105 2·104 Absent Present Absent Present 47 500 3 6 9 15 20 3 6 9 15 20 3 6 9 15 20 0 3 2 2 0 3 2 2  7     1 1 TABLE I. The main simulation parameters: tend defines the total number of time steps and ∆twrite is the frequency for saving data. The box side is given in the natural length scale of the system, which is set by the division volume Vdiv. Considering HeLa cells , Vdiv of the order of unity corresponds to a length scale of 10 µm. The dose D and the parameters α and β describe the action of the beam and the radiation resistance of the tissue according to Eq. . This is, however, not the case due to time scales. In par- ticular, the time unit in CellSim3D is determined by cellular growth . The program saves the state of the system in the output file once every twrite steps, where twrite, namely the output frame frequency, is a number chosen by the user. Therefore, if the time interval be- tween two successive frames reflects a period longer than 30 minutes, the beam can be considered as instantaneous. In our simulations, the life cycle of a cancerous cell defined from the newborn state and ending with division, lasts less than 1,500 integration steps. In real time scales, the cell cycle of a human cancerous cell has a duration of about 24-72 hours, mitosis taking about 1 hour, setting one single frame to be in that range. Therefore, since one frame stands for a period longer than any dose delivery, cell death can be thought as instantaneous. In reality, dead cells undergo phagocytosis . We modeled this process as follows: when phagocytosis is activated, the program progressively lowers the internal pressure of the dead cells, until the threshold defined by the user is reached. The rationale is that by decreas- ing the volume of the dead cells they become very soft and flexible, and free up space for the live cells to pro- liferate. The effect of this is essentially the same as the full removal of the dead cells but without the compu- tational complexity required by restoring the topology of the system and neighbor tables. Phagocytosis is, in general, much faster than cellular reproduction and hence the shrinking rate for the dead cells is set to be ten times the growth rate of alive cells. The factor of ten is arbitrary but crucial (although its value can be changed if/when needed): while the unit of time for the simula- tion is determined by the cell cycle , it is important to keep the events that occur within a single simulation in the right order. In the current approach, two different cell types are present simultaneously. The first cell type represents healthy and the second one cancerous cells; we note that the type of cells is not limited to two, but can be var- ied as necessary. The two types of cells are identical in all parameters but Young’s modulus, which describes the cell stiffness; cancer cells are typically considered to be softer than healthy cells . Cells with a higher Young’s modulus are less prone to deformation and therefore grow slowly when compared to softer cells. Slower growth re- sults in slower division, which mirrors the well-known fact that cancer cells proliferate faster than healthy ones . In prior studies this approach has been successfully ap- plied to study tumor growth in epithelial tissues . III. RESULTS The CellSim3D model for mechanobiological studies of growth, division and proliferation of cells has been successfully validated against experimental data for the mitotic index and packing of epithelial cells , and it has been used to study tissue growth under differ- 4 System a for alive cells a for dead cells x0 for alive cells x0 for dead cells % of alive cells Packed Open − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  - − ±  − ±  − ±  - − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±  − ±   ±   ±   ±  - − ±  − ±  − ±  -  ±   ±   ±  100  60  100    TABLE II. Parameters for the exponential fits, a and x0 in Eq. 3. The tails for the probability densities of contact forces were fitted by an exponential, Eq. 3. We report here the parameters for each simulation both in the case of fixed volume (Packed ) and open growth (Open), and for four different dead-alive final ratios. There are no dead cells in the first row of each block since the beam was turned off (see the parameters in Table I). parisons were made with published experimental results for radiation (photon) treatment for the human prostate cancer PC-3 cell line . The second setup was aimed at the investigation of the force distribution in the system for a broad range of final states, varying the percentage of alive cells and the size of the box. We found good agreement despite the varying experimental setups. The main parameters of the simulations described in the next sections are summed up in Table I. We will discuss these validations in the next two sections. A. Contact force probability density Eight different simulations were executed using differ- ent sizes of the simulation box, and percentage of dead cells at the final step. The spatial configurations are la- beled as open in the case of an infinite box with open boundaries and packed in the case of a rigid box filled at the level of more than 80% at the final step of the simulation (confluence or close to confluence). The per- centages of alive cells at the end of the simulation were, respectively, 100% (beam absent), 80%, 60% and 40%. We reserved, in each simulation, 6% of the time steps for the system to relax after radiation delivery. Up to 60,000 cells were simulated in each case. It has been shown that near the jamming transition the probability density of the inter-particle forces P (f ) de- cays nearly exponentially at large forces; the exponential tail is a signature of disorder and mechanical frustration. We observed that, as the packing density is increased, the tail of the distribution crosses over to a Gaussian in- dicating a more uniform force distribution. This is in line with previous experimental and simulation studies . We extracted the probability density of the contact forces P (f ). The force f is normalized by the mode of the distribution, such that the peak is at f = 1. The probability densities are renormalized after cutting off the last 1% of the distribution, since the points in that range have a very low statistics and represent, in the case of alive cells, newborns which have anomalously high values caused by the conformation after the division al- FIG. 1. Comparison of the normalized probability density of dead cells in the simulations with a beam delivery. Fitting parameters for the Gaussian (Eq. 2) and exponential (Eq. 3) distribution are shown in Tables II and III. D1, D2 and D3 are the fractions of dead cells in the final frame of the simulation, and have the values D1 ≈ 20%, D2 ≈ 40% and D3 ≈ 60%. ent conditions [24, 43]. The addition of new features in CellSim3D requires two different types of validations. First, we compared the packing properties of cells to those obtained from experiments for elastic spheres and found very good agreement. We compared also the contact forces and their distributions, in particular with respect to the jamming transition. The distribution of forces displays an exponential tail, in agreement with experimental data from elastic shells . There are only very few force measurements in cellular systems, but Trepat et al. measured traction distributions using Madin-Darby canine kidney cells, finding that the peak of the distribution can be well approximated by a Gaus- sian, while the tail is an exponential, in excellent agree- ment with our model predictions. This will be discussed in detail in Section III A 1. A second validation was performed with respect to radiation treatment, with two simulation setups. The first setup was aimed at testing the radiation beam in a common pathology such as prostate tumor: direct com- gorithm. We fitted the peak of the distribution with a Gaussian function g(A, x0, σ; x) = Ae− (x−x0 )2 2σ2 and the tail with an exponential function f (x; a, x0) = ea(x−x0) in order to to determine the stress transfer and the state of the system with respect to the point of the jamming transition. In Eqs. 2 and 3 above, A and a are the re- spective amplitudes, x0 the position of the peak and σ the width of the Gaussian. 1. Analysis of the fit The parameter values from fitting to an exponential, Eq. 3, and the survival percentages are shown in Ta- ble II, and the probability densities of the dead cells in the six simulations with the beam active are shown in Fig. 1. Table II shows interesting features: First, the steepness of the tails of the distributions is higher in the open systems than in the packed ones. This is expected, since the packed system is characterized by less space per particle, thus causing a more abundant population of stronger forces. The same steepness pattern is found when comparing dead and alive cells, in both spatial con- figurations. There are two interpretations: • The shrinking of the dead cells, i.e., mimicking phagocytosis, was not complete. Therefore, the majority of the dead cells have some free space around them and are not completely packed with their neighbors, resulting in softer contact and lower peak forces. • Implementation of cell shrinking: As a cell gains in- ternal pressure when growing, it loses internal pres- sure when shrinking. Cells whose internal pressure is close to Pdead, the lower threshold, have a weaker pressure force ⃗F P , which points from the center of mass outward, and, in principle, prevents the cell from folding. Cells with lower pressure are more prone to becoming concave in some areas, decreas- ing the contact area with the neighbors, and hence the total contact force on the cell. We also observed that the relative errors of the dead cells are higher than those of alive cells. Moreover, the relative errors of the open space simulations are higher than those in the packed ones. These facts reflect the abundance of statistics at higher forces. In fact, the shorter the sample in the tail, the higher the probability for some bins of the histogram to contain only one or two points. The latter ones flatten the tail and augment the spread. This feature does not depend on the binning of the histogram and can be explained exactly as in the previous paragraph. 5 Parameter Packed dead Open dead  ±   ±   ±   ±   ±   ±  σ A x0 TABLE III. Parameters for the Gaussian fit (Eq. 2) for dead cells both in the case of fixed volume (Packed ) and open growth (Open), in the simulation with a final percentage of 40% dead cells. σ, representing the width of the Gaussian, is related to the stress transfer and describes the status of our system with respect to the jamming transition. x0 is forced to be ≈ 1 since the distributions are normalized to have the peak at f = 1. We report the set of parameters fitted only for one dose (2 Gy, determining a final dead to total cells ratio of 40%) since variations in the fit for other simulations with different final ratios are negligible and well within the statistics. The parameter values from fitting to a Gaussian, Eq. 2, are shown in Table III. We notice that in the case of fixed volume (packed) spatial configuration, the peak is more than twice wider than in the case of free growth (open boundary) having σpacked =  ±  and σopen =  ± , respectively. This is easily explained by the fact that in a free growth environment only few cells at the very core feel strong forces from their neighbors, while cells at the border proliferate freely and tend to expand the system and reduce contacts with their neigh- bors rather than compress the system. This is not pos- sible when the system has filled all the available volume, and higher forces are experienced throughout the system. This fact is also expressed in the statistical error of σ. The exponential tails and the widths of the Gaussians provide insight on the state of the system with respect to the jamming transition. When the system has little to no volume available, cell mobility decreases dramatically, and the cells stick together forming a compact granular tissue. In this case, the force distribution has a long ex- ponential tail with a very marked slope difference from the initial, Gaussian peak. This is evident in the force distribution of dead cells in the packed configuration in Fig. 1. A similar result can be found in Fig. 7b of , where the authors showed the force distribution of a sys- tem of bidimensional cells with high friction and no free volume available. On the other hand, when the system has room to expand at its borders and little free space in its core due to the deflation of dead cells, the expo- nential tail is still present but way steeper and almost contiguous to the Gaussian peak. This is the case of the dead cells in the open space configuration in Fig. 1. The system is still dense in its core, but cell mobility is still considerable and clusters of cells can move. This is again in agreement with , where the authors show in their Fig. 7a the same system but with null friction. Even if the volume available is still zero, the absence of fric- tion facilitates independent cell movement and keeps the system at the jamming threshold. Label α [Gy]−1 β [Gy]−2  αβ-1  αβ-2  αβ-3 7 Deweese et al.   Algan et al. Leith et al. Data from TABLE IV. Survival parameters from other studies, and used in the current simulations. The parameters α and β describe the survival probability of a cell hit by a beam of dose D according to Eq. 1. 2. Shape of the distributions shows that the peaks of the probability dis- tributions for the packed configuration are, in general, lower than the ones of the free distribution. This is sim- ply caused by the longer tail, and the normalization of the distributions. Since the domain is longer and the area is fixed to unity, the peak at the mode ¯f must be lower. We notice that both tails have an exponential shape, but the cells that are in open space exhibit a steeper decay. Due to the normalization of the probability density, the cells in with the open boundary conditions are more peaked around the maximum. The difference in peak height is also found when comparing the force probability distri- butions of alive and dead cells in the packed vs. open graphs, as shown in Fig. 1. The shapes of the curves of cells from the same spatial configuration are basically the same. 3. Comparison with experimental data We now compare our results with the experimental data of Jose et al. . They prepared thousands of micron-sized elastic shells suspended in a solvent, ap- plied different loads to the samples, and extracted the force distribution. They found an initial peak and a long exponential tail. The most impressive similarities are found between our distributions in the packed configura- tion in Fig. 1, and their curves at low fractions of volume occupied by grain. This is expected, since the system in our simulation does not fill completely the volume at its disposal, but it is still compressed in five out of six sides of the cubic box. There are, however, two notable differences. The first is that in our work, the gradient between the peak and the initial value, at f ≈ 0, is high, ranging from two to three orders of magnitude. In their case, the difference is small and, in some curves, displays a plateau. Their abundance of low forces is explained by the fact that, in the small force domain, they compute the forces with a linear equation, starting from the deformation of the grain. They observe a plateau when the fraction of space occupied by the grains is lower than . The hard sphere packing theorem states that the maximum volume occupied by hard spheres packed in space is π ≈ , √ 2 3 while the limit for random packing is  . 6 Therefore, since the density of soft grains in Ref. is even smaller than the limit density of hard grains, and it is comparable with the threshold of randomly packed hard spheres, multiple soft grains in their experiment must have no deformation at all, giving abundance of points at low force. On the other hand, in our case, cells proliferate from an initial core, and any cell at the border of the system has at least one neighbor with which it is in contact, thus yielding a force contribution close to the mean and far from zero. The second difference to the distributions in Ref. is the fact that they measured forces up to 4 times the mean force, while we detected values that were 7 times higher than our peak value ¯f (which is proximal to the mean and set to unity in Fig. 1). This fact, however, is explained by how the forces act In a packed configuration, neighbor cells are constantly pushed one against the other, and a linear repulsion ⃗F R arises. Since the force has no upper bound, the repulsion force can become arbitrarily large, and in close packing it can easily reach high values. They also observed a Gaussian behavior away from the jamming point by augmenting the load, and therefore the fraction of space occupied by the grains. Although our open boundary simulations also show a behavior similar to a Gaussian right after the peak, the setup is too dif- ferent to be reliable for a comparison, since there is no load on our system, and the packing in the core of the system is only due to cell-cell adhesion. Trepat et al. measured traction distributions in ca- nine kidney cells. Although we cannot compare their re- sults quantitatively – we have force distributions – quali- tative features can be compared. The data and fits shown in Fig. 1 are in excellent agreement with the traction data of Trepat et al. which also shows Gaussian peaks and exponential tails. B. Cell survival: the comparison with prostate cancer data Three data sets of survival parameters (α, β) were extracted from the α/β ratios present in literature along with three data sets [52–54] on the dead-to-alive ratios for the PC-3 cell line. In all cases radiation was delivered by a photon beam with no fractionation. We list the survival parameters in Table IV. The survival parameters α and β do not depend on the dose D, but only on the nature of the beam and the structure of the tissue. However, these experimental val- ues come from studies with different aims, namely the impact of the over-expression of a specific gene or a spe- cific protein on the radiosensitivity of the tissue. Hence, these experimental data are influenced by external fac- tors and the cell culture samples may also meet varying experimental conditions due to specific preparations, as listed below: • In Kiprianou et al. the influence of an over- expression of a specific gene on radiosensitivity 7 FIG. 2. Percentage of surviving cells in our simulations (dashed lines), labeled with their α and β parameters (Ta- ble IV), and experimental data (solid lines) taken from Kipri- anou et al. (orange), Russell et al. (magenta) and Yun et al. (olive green). was carefully analyzed and compared with refer- ence measurements performed on a pure PC-3 cul- ture. Here, we used these unbiased reference data. • Russell et al. investigated the radiosensitivity enhancement caused by the expression of a specific protein. The study presents a control, in which the sample was mixed with a specific concentration of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) before irradiation. In this work, we used these unbiased data. • In the case of Yun et al. the radiosensitivity enhancement was caused by the lack of a protein. Also in this case, we used the reference control, where the irradiated sample presents an endoge- nous level of the protein. It is important to notice that, especially for improve- ments and accuracy, although we have chosen unbiased (or less biased) published data sets, differences in sam- ple preparation, vector substance, and cell counting may complicate any quantitative comparison. The simulation results and the experimental data ex- tracted from