Continuous and discrete compartmental models for infectious disease Gustavo A. Sousa1†, Diogo L. M. Souza2†, Enrique C. Gabrick3*†, Patr´ıcio D. C. dos Reis2†, Lucas E. Bentivoglio2†, Antonio M. Batista2,4†, Jos´e D. Szezech Jr.2,3,4† 1 Department of Physics, State University of Ponta Grossa, 84030-900, Ponta Grossa, PR, Brazil.. 2Graduate Program in Science, State University of Ponta Grossa, 84030-900, Ponta Grossa, PR, Brazil. 3Institute of Physics, University of S˜ao Paulo, 05315-970, S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brazil. 4Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of Ponta Grossa, 84030-900, Ponta Grossa, PR, Brazil. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): ecgabrick@gmail.com; †These authors contributed equally to this work. Abstract The study of infectious disease propagation is essential for understanding and controlling epidemics. One of the most useful tools for gaining insights into the spread of infectious diseases is mathematical modelling. In terms of mathematical epidemiology, the main models are based on compartments, such as Susceptible– Infected (SI), Susceptible–Infected–Recovered (SIR), and Susceptible–Exposed– Infected–Recovered (SEIR). These models oﬀer mathematical frameworks for representing the proliferation dynamics of various diseases, for instance ﬂu and smallpox. In this work, we explore these models using two distinct mathemat- ical approaches, Cellular Automata (CA) and Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations (ODEs). They are able to reproduce the spread dynamics of diseases with their own individuality. CA models incorporate the local interaction among individu- als with discrete time and space, while ODEs provide a continuous and simpliﬁed view of a disease propagation in large and homogeneous populations. By com- paring these two approaches, we ﬁnd that the shape of the curves of all models is similar for both representations. Although, the growth rates diﬀer between CA and ODE. One of our results is to show that the CA yields a power-law growth, 1 5 2 0 2 r p A 6 1 ] E P . o i b - q [ 1 v 3 5 9 3 1 . 4 0 5 2 : v i X r a while the ODE growth rate is well-represented by an exponential function. Fur- thermore, a substantial contribution of our work is using a hyperbolic tangent to ﬁt the initial growth of infected individuals for all the considered models. Our results display a strong correlation between simulated data and adjusted function. We mainly address this successful result by the fact that the hyperbolic function captures both growing: the power-law (when considered the ﬁrst terms of inﬁnite sums) and combinations of exponential (when the hyperbolic function is written via exponential). Therefore, our work shows that when modelling a disease the choice of mathematical representation is crucial, in particular to model the onset of an epidemic. Keywords: Cellular automata, Epidemiology, Diﬀerential Equations. 1 Introduction Infectious disease spread is a worldwide problem that has aﬀected the humanity throughout the history . Understanding the spread of illness is an important topic for the modern science, improving the forecast and control methods . One powerful tool to investigate the disease spread is the mathematical models . The investigation can be done via statistical modelling , Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations (ODEs) , Partial Diﬀerential Equations , Cellular Automaton (CAs) , Machine Learning , among others [9–12]. In some cases, speciﬁcally in ODE and CA, the modelling is mostly made based on compartmental models . Compartmental epidemiological models have their origins in attempts to quantify and predict the spread of infectious diseases. One of the most inﬂuential models was proposed by William Hamer in 1906, using the concept of “mass action” transmis- sion . In this model, the rate of new cases is proportional to the product of the health and the sick individuals. However, it was the model proposed by Kermack and McKendrick , in 1927, that laid the foundation for modern compartmental models. These models compartmentalise the host population according to the status of infection. The main compartments are Susceptible (S), Exposed (E), Infected (I) and Recovered (R) states . S compartment is responsible for holding healthy individuals who can contract the infection, E compartment contains the individuals who are infected but not infectious, namely latent period . The infectious agents are in the I compartment. After the individuals pass through the infectious stage, they evolve to R. Combinations of these compartments and inclusion of new ones lead to several models. In this work, we focus on Susceptible–Infected (SI), Susceptible–Infected–Recovered (SIR) and Susceptible–Exposed–Infected–Recovered (SEIR) models. The ﬁrst model is adequate for diseases that confer a lifelong infection, such as AIDS . The second model is adequate for diseases in which the healthy individual becomes infected and, after a time interval, acquires a permanent immunity, for instance measles . The SEIR is employed to describe illness with latent period, and one recent example is COVID-19 . These models can be described in diﬀerent mathematical frameworks. In this work, we analyze the CA and ODE and compare their results. 2 CAs are mathematical models capable of simulating complex biological, chemical, and physical processes . They were proposed by Stanislaw Ulam and John von Neumann during the 1940s. The CA model is deﬁned as a grid of cells that evolve according to local rules based on the states of their nearest neighbors . Later, the concept was expanded, most notably with John Conway’s “Game of Life”, which used CA to demonstrate complex behaviors emerging from simple rules . In mathematical epidemiology, CAs have been used to model the spread of infec- tious diseases in discrete and spatially distributed populations . Their relevance grew during the 1980s and 1990s with research focusing on the inﬂuence of spatial structure and human mobility on disease dissemination [24, 25]. CA has been applied to study the spread of HIV , dengue , and inﬂuenza outbreaks , allowing the simulation of hypothetical scenarios and the integration of real data for more accurate predictions and strategic control . In the study of epidemiology, ODEs are employed to model the dynamics of infec- tious disease transmission in homogeneous populations, enabling the analysis of factors such as transmission rate, recovery rate, and the impact of interventions, providing eﬀective approaches for infectious disease control [32, 33]. In this work, we study the compartmental models SI, SIR, and SEIR using CA and ODE. By comparing the results, we aim to identify and analyse the similarities and dif- ferences between these two approaches. Our results show that the CA and ODE exhibit distinct growth rate for the infected populations in the models studied. The growth of the infected population in the CA model follows a power-law function, while in the ODE model is better represented by an exponential function. Our study highlights the unique characteristics of each mathematical approach, enabling future studies to choose the most appropriate method for accurately representing experimental data. Moreover, a key ﬁnding is that the hyperbolic tangent is a strong candidate to ﬁt the initial growth of infected individuals for all the considered models in both represen- tations. This occurs mainly due to the fact that the hyperbolic tangent encompasses power-law growth (in the ﬁrst terms of inﬁnite sums) and exponential representations. This work is organized as following: In Section 2, we present the mathematical framework of CA and ODE. Thereafter, the SI model is discussed in Section 3. Results concerning to SIR and SEIR model are present in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Finally, we draw our conclusions in Section 6. 2 Methodology Cellular automata are considered discrete representations of partial diﬀerential equations . They are mathematical models characterized by discrete space, time, and state variables . A model based on CA framework can have n space dimen- sions. In this work, we consider n = 2, where n is the space dimension, and a square grid compose of M × M identical cells (Ci,j). The time evolution depends on pre- deﬁned rules and the neighborhood. The rules are deﬁned according to the problem to be modelled and the neighborhood is deﬁned by taking the closest neighbors of Ci,j. In this work, we consider a two space dimension where the neighbors belongs to the von Neumann neighborhood, i.e., the set of neighbors in the four closest cells 3 . The time step is deﬁned when the transition rules are applied to the whole grid, simultaneously. In this work, for each epidemiological model, we assume that each cell in the CA represents one individual. Our grid consist of M × M cells, where M = 100, implying in a population equal to N = 10000, and we employ the von Neumann neighbourhood with periodic boundary conditions. The transition rules speciﬁc to each compartmental model are detailed in their respective sections. The position of the infected cells in the grid are randomly selected. Therefore, the CA model considered is probabilistic, the epidemic curves are an average of 100 independent simulations. Since their development, ODEs have been applied across various ﬁelds of knowl- edge. In physics, they are used to describe the behaviour of dynamic systems, such as neuronal modelling , pendulum oscillations , ﬂuid dynamics , and others. In epidemiological studies, ODEs have been used to model the dynamics of infectious dis- ease transmission in homogeneous populations . They allow the analysis of factors such as transmission rates, recovery rates, and the impact of interventions, providing an eﬀective approach for developing disease control strategies [40, 41]. In this work, to numerically integrate the diﬀerential equations, we use the 4th- order Runge-Kutta method with a ﬁxed step equal to h = . 3 SI model One of the simplest compartmental models extensively used is the SI. This model describes the spread of diseases where the I individuals have lifelong infection, such as AIDS or mosquitoes infected by dengue . shows the interaction between the S and I compartments, where the arrow indicates the ﬂow of individuals. Above the arrow, we include the notation βI/N , which represents the force of infection, that deﬁne the infection contraction of each S individual , and β is the product between transmission probability and contact rates. In this way, the rate in which new infected individuals are produced is βSI/N . S Fig. 1: Compartmental diagram of the SI model. Firstly, we simulate the SI model using CA approach. During each iteration, if one or more neighbors are I, each S can evolve to I with a rate β. Once a cell becomes I, it remains in that compartment for the rest of the simulation. This approach allows an analysis of the spatial and temporal dynamics of the infection, which is useful for understanding the spread patterns. We consider states set U = {S, I} = {1, 2}. Then, the update rules of the each cell Ci,j (t) (Susceptible or Infected) are summarized as follow: 4 1. The susceptible cells verify the presence of neighbour infected cells, than each adjacent infected cell infects the susceptible cell with a probability β. 2. Once the susceptible cell is infected, it evolves to the infected state and stays there trying to contaminate S adjacent cells. By implementing the rules with parameters listed in , we show the spa- tial evolution of SI model in Fig. 2, in CA framework. It is worth mentioning that the parameter values are arbitrary, since we are not modeling any real disease, but rather exploring fundamental relationships of both formulations (ODE and CA). How- ever, once selected the parameters values, they need to be equal for both approaches, including the fraction of initial individuals. Figures 2(a), 2(b), and 2(c) are snapshots at t = 15, 30, and 45, respectively. In these results, and in the rest of the paper, we represent S cells by black colour and I by red. For t = 15 (Fig. 2(a)), we observe the emergence of many infection focus, which are centred in the infected initial condition. As t advances, each aggregation grows in the grid. In Fig. 2(c), we select the snapshot when t = 45, for in this a signiﬁcant part of the grid is red. Nonetheless, the equilibrium is reached when all the cells become I; for our para- metric conﬁguration, this occurs at t ≈ 100. It is important to mention that these snapshots are for one random initial condition, if the initial infected cells are disposed in other position, the snapshots assume diﬀerent shape. A major advantage of CA is the ability to capture spatial variations, thereby representing the rapid infection of densely populated areas. : Parameters for the SI model considering CA and ODEs. The initial condition for S is S = N − I. Parameter Values (CA) Values (ODE) N β I 10000  100 (N ) 1   (a) t=15 (b) t=30 (c) t=45 100 75 j 50 25 0 100 75 j 50 25 0 100 75 j 50 25 S I 0 0 25 75 50 i 50 i Fig. 2: Time and spatial evolution of the SI model via CA. The black color displays the susceptible and red the infected individuals. 50 i 100 100 75 25 75 25 0 0 100 5 Next, we implement the SI through ODEs. The equations represent the change rate of S(t) and I(t) compartments: dS dt dI dt = −β SI N , = β SI N , where N = S + I is the total population . Using this constraint the model can be uncoupled and solved analytically. Considering S = N − I in Eq. , we get dI dt = β N I(N − I), where the solution for I is given by I(t) = I0N eβt N + I0(eβt − 1) , and for S(t) = N −I(t). The I number grows as an exponential function which depends on β. If S ≈ N and I(t) ≪ N , a rapid spread of the disease occurs according to an exponential function dependent on β. Although we keep the capital notation in the equations for ODEs approaches, the epidemic curves are normalised, i.e., s = S/N , i = I/N , and so on. As the disease spreads, the number of susceptible individuals decreases, going to zero, while the number of infected individuals reaches a plateau close to the total num- ber of individuals in the population. Eventually, the number of new cases stabilizes, and all susceptible individuals become infected. With both mathematical formulation (CA and ODE) for SI model, we implement numerical solutions for both cases, the parameters for CA and ODE are described in . From the CA model, the population in S compartment starts to move to I until this compartment to be ﬁlled (Fig. 3(a)). The same dynamics is observed in ODE framework. Taking the limit t → ∞ in Eq. we get (S, I) = (0, N ), showing that all the population moves from S to I. This is not necessarily true for the next analyzed models. A numerical simulation corroborates this analysis, as shown in Fig. 3(b), where we observe the changes between the compartments. The solutions displayed in Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b) have a similar behaviour. How- ever, when we analyse the increase of infected individuals for short times, we can infer the diﬀerences, as exhibited in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d). In CA, the decrease in susceptible and the increase in infected individuals is slower compared to the ODE formula- tion (Fig. 3(b)). To compare the initial growth in both formulations, we propose a power-law for CA, for ODE framework: ICA(t) = KtB, IODE(t) = K exp (Bt), 6 and to compare both growing, we consider a hyperbolic tangent: b I(t) = α (1 + tanh(ξt + φ)) , b where α ∈ [0, 1] is the amplitude, ξ is the growing rate, and φ is a phase. I(t) corresponds to the individuals, tanh and φ are dimensionless, and ξ has 1/time unity. In this way, α is the number of individuals who become sick in a time interval, i.e., an incidence factor. The initial time evolution of i curve (until I = N ) for both approaches is displayed in Fig. 3(c) and 3(d). In the panel (c), the red line is for i, while the green dotted line is the adjustment using Eq. for K =  ±  and B =  ± , with R2 = 6; and the black triangle is the ﬁtting using Eq. , for α =  ± , ξ =  ± , φ = − ± , and R2 = 8. Both curves describe the initial grow of i individuals. We conduct a similar analysis for the ODE formulation (Fig. 3(d)). For Eq. , we obtain K = 76 ± 01 and B = 62 ± 04, and R2 = 87, shown by the blue dotted line; and for Eq. , α =  ± , ξ = 00 ± 03, φ = − ± , and R2 = 98, exhibited by the black triangle. In the analysed cases, we obtain a signiﬁcant R2, for all the ﬁts, but we note that the infection modelled by CA grows as a power-law, while via ODEs follows an exponential. A hyperbolic tangent is able to ﬁt both grows. For SI this approach works for the whole time of i(t), however, for other models which present a bell shape of infection, this function is adequate just for short and medium times, i.e., times before the peak. For these parametric conﬁgurations and analysing the adjustments, we observe that the infected curve grows faster for CA than ODE. This diﬀerence in infection speed also arises due to the ODE model is treating the population as a continuous medium, ignoring spatial interactions between individuals. 4 SIR model The SIR model describes the transition from an infected state to a recovered one. It is able to mimic spread of diseases where individuals obtain permanent immunity after the infectious period, for instance measles and smallpox . shows the interactions between the compartments in SIR. We consider a new parameter γ, which is the recovery rate and 1/γ gives the average infectious time. We set up a CA formulation for the SIR model, where the transition between diﬀerent compartments is governed by infection probability β and recovery probability γ. The set of states is U = {S, I, R} = {1, 2, 3}. The S cell can become I with probability β if it has at least one infected neighbor. After a cell becomes infected, it recovers with a probability γ. We do not consider mortality due to the disease, then after a long simulation time, the entire population will be in R compartment. The transition rules of SIR are similar to those of SI, the only diﬀerence is the addition of the transition to R state. A summary of the state transition rules for the SIR model is 7 5 7 6 7 Fig. 3: Time evolution of s(t) (green line) and i(t) (red line) in the panels (a) and (b), for CA and ODE, respectively. The panels (c) and (d) display the respective infected curve for both approaches, where the red line is for i, the green dotted line is the adjustment using Eq. , the black triangle is the ﬁtting using Eq. , and the blue dotted line is the adjustment given by Eq. . S R Fig. 4: Diagram of the compartments for the SIR model. β describes the eﬀective rate of infection and γ represents the recovery rate. 1. An infected cell can contaminate an adjacent S cell with probability β. If there are multiple infected cells around a susceptible cell, each I cell contaminates the S cell with probability β. 2. When a S cell is infected by one of its neighbours, it evolves to the infected state. 3. An infected cell can recover from the pathology with probability γ. Upon recovery, the infected cell goes to the R state and remains there. shows the spatial and temporal evolution of the SIR based on CA formu- lation with parameters described in . At the beginning of the simulation (Fig. 5(a)), there are only a few infected and recovered cells. Over time, there is a wave of I transmitting the disease to S, where the growing is like a circle centred in the initial position of i, and the centre of the circle contain R individuals, as observed in Fig. 5(b). For long times of simulation, the number of R individuals increases until nearly the entire population (Fig. 5(c)). Due to permanent immunity, the number of infected individuals decreases exponentially. 8 t=10 (a) 100 75 j 50 25 (b) 100 75 j 50 25 t=20 (c) t=35 100 75 j 50 25 S I R 0 0 0 0 75 25 100 50 i 50 i Fig. 5: Time evolution of CA for SIR for (a) t = 10, (b) t = 20, and (c) t = 35. Black colour represents the susceptible, red colour the infected and yellow the recovered individuals. 50 i 100 100 75 25 25 75 0 0 : Parameters of SIR for CA and ODEs. The initial condition for S is S = N − I. Parameters Values (CA) Values (ODEs) N β γ I R 10000   100 (N ) 0 1    0 We study the SIR model described by ODEs, that is given by three coupled diﬀerential equations: = −β SI N , − γI, = β SI N = γI, dS dt dI dt dR dt where β is the infection rate and γ is the recovery rate. This model also obeys the constraint S + I + R = N . This way, it is possible to rewrite one of the Eqs. - into an algebraic expression. For example, the system can be reduced to two diﬀerential equations by taking R = N − S − I. Due to the non-linearity in Eqs. - , it is not possible to reduce the number of equations as we made for the SI model. Another diﬀerence from SI model is that the transmission stops when there are no I individuals, not when all S becomes I. A comparison between the S, I and R curves in the both frameworks is displayed in Fig. 6, where Fig. 6(a) is for CA and Fig. 6(b) for ODE. The behavior observed in these curves arises from the inherent nature of the models: CA captures spatial interactions, while ODE concentrates on temporal dynamics. CA allows the study of infection spread in spatially heterogeneous populations, revealing new patterns such as damped oscillations . In contrast, the SIR model ODE focus on the temporal development of epidemics through non-linear diﬀerential equations. 9 Another diﬀerence is in the growth of I individuals, as noted previously. Following the same strategy, we ﬁt the I curve until the time where I reaches N . For CA, we consider Eq. and obtain parameters equal to K = ±, B = ± and R2 = 7. This curve is displayed in Fig. 6(c) by the green dotted line. Meanwhile, for the ODE, we use Eq. getting K = 5 ± 1, B = 7 ± 1, and R2 = 6 (blue dotted line in Fig. 6(d)). For the analysed case, we observe that the I number in CA formalism grows like a power-law, while in ODE as an exponential function. We verify the adjustment given by Eq. , for CA: α =  ± , ξ =  ± , φ = − ± , and R2 = 6; and for the ODE: α = 27 ± 07, ξ = 47 ± 03, φ = −7 ± 3, and R2 = 96. Both adjustments are shown in Figs. 6(c) and 6(d), respectively, by the black triangles. 5 7 6 7 Fig. 6: Temporal evolution of s (green line), i (red line), and r (blue line) of the SIR model for (a) CA and (b) ODE. In the panels (c) and (d), we show the i curve for CA and ODE, respectively, followed by the adjustments given by Eq. in green dotted line, Eq. in blue dotted, and Eq. by the black triangles. 5 SEIR model The SEIR model is represented by the diagram in Fig. 7, it is an extension of SIR by including a new compartment. This model is appropriate to describe the disease in which one individual comes into contact with one infected agent and becomes contaminated. After that, the exposed individuals go through the latent period, during which they are not able to spread the disease. The time interval of latent period is equal to 1/ω. Once infected, the individual spreads the illness and after 1/γ becomes R. We analyze SEIR via CA, where U = {S, E, I, R} = {1, 2, 3, 4}. In this model, S cells become exposed if they are adjacent to infected cells and the transition is 10 S E R Fig. 7: Compartment diagram for the SEIR model. β describes the eﬀective rate of infection, ω represents the rate of transfer from exposed to infectious, and γ represents the recovery rate. determined by the probability β. Exposed cells progress to the I state with probability ω, that is related to the incubation period. During the incubation period the exposed cell does not transmit the disease to its neighbours. Infected cells recover with a probability γ, transitioning to the R state. The CA rule for the SEIR model can be summarised as follows 1. The evolution of the S cell to E state occurs with a probability β (infection rate), if there is at least one adjacent infected cell. 2. Exposed cells do not transmit the diseases to other cells. These cells can transi- tion to infected state (Ci,j (t) = 3) with probability ω (incubation rate). Once the exposed cell evolves to an infected cell, it begins to expose adjacent cells to the pathology. 3. An infected cell can recover from the diseases with probability γ (recovery rate). Once recovered, the infected cell updates to a recovered cell, state which the cell remains for the entire simulation. Implementing the previous rules, we obtain the spatial-temporal evolution for the SEIR model, as exhibited in Fig. 8(a)-(c), for t = 10, 15, and 25, respectively. The parameters are displayed in . As I advances infecting individuals, the agents in the centre of the circle evolve to R. The ﬁnal state is a grid full of R. : Parameters considered in the CA for SEIR. The initial condition for S is S = N − I − E. Parameters Values (CA) Values (ODE) N β γ ω E I R 10000    100 (N ) 100 (N ) 0 1      0 Considering an ODE approach, the SEIR model is described by dS dt dE dt = = , −βSI N βSI N − ωE, 11 (a) t=10 100 75 j 50 25 0 (b) 100 75 j 50 25 0 t=15 (c) t=25 100 75 j 50 25 S E I R 0 0 25 75 100 50 i 0 25 50 i Fig. 8: Spatial-temporal evolution of the CA for SEIR for (a) t = 10, (b) t = 15, and (c) t = 25. The colour of each individual represents the compartment of the cell: susceptible individuals are represented by black, exposed by purple, infected by red and recovered by yellow. 100 100 75 25 50 75 0 i dI dt dR dt = ωE − γI, = γI, where the restriction N = S + E + I + R is valid. Using the constraint, the Eqs. - are reduced to three ODEs systems by computing R via R = N − (S + E + I). The dynamics are more complex than those of the SIR model due to the inclusion of the exposed compartment, which represents a delay between infection and the onset of infectiousness. The delay can inﬂuence both the speed and intensity of epidemic outbreaks. The disease can spread more slowly initially due to the incubation period, however, once the exposed individuals become infectious, there can be a rapid increase in the cases. The temporal evolution of S, E, I, and R individuals are shown in Fig. 9. The panels (a) and (b) shows the temporal evolution for CA and ODEs formalism, respec- tively. The curve shape of CA and ODE approach are similar. The diﬀerence occurs basically in the beginning of the outbreak. Note that the E individuals increase faster in CA, while in ODE, they grow slowly for t < 20 and after that assume an exponential increase. To verify which function better describes the start of the outbreak. We adjust the CA curve via Eq. , getting K = 9 ± 5, B =  ± , and R2 = 7 (green dotted line in Fig. 9(c)). For the ODE approach, via Eq. , we obtain K = 77 ± 08, B =  ± , and R2 = 9 (blue dotted line in Fig. 9(d)). Then, we employ Eq. for CA and ODE. For the ﬁrst one, the parameter is α =  ± , ξ =  ± , φ = − ± , and R2 = 7; and for the second α = 60 ± 07, ξ = 34 ± 02, φ = −0 ± 3, and R2 = 96. The black triangles display both ﬁttings in Fig. 9(c) and (d). Comparing the previous descriptions for SI and SIR, the power-law and exponential do not describe very well the i curve for SEIR, otherwise, the hyperbolic tangent keeps being a good adjustment. 12 6 7 5 7 Fig. 9: Temporal evolution of s (green line), e (purple line), i (red line), and r (blue line) of SEIR for (a) CA and (b) ODE. In panels (c) and (d), we show the i curve for CA and ODE, respectively, followed by the adjustments given by Eq. in green dotted line, Eq. blue dotted, and Eq. by the black triangles. 6 Conclusions In this work, we investigate three epidemiological models: SI, SIR and SEIR. To simulate these models, we use two diﬀerent techniques: cellular automata (CA) and ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODE). We made a direct comparison between both approaches. Our results shows that the mathematical representation aﬀects profoundly the modelling output. Our main observation is that the infected initial growth in CA approach is better described by a power-law, while in ODE the infected number grows as an exponential function. In addition, we propose an adjustment based on hyperbolic tangent, which represents very well both growth. It is important to know how I grows in the beginning of outbreak. Knowing this, we are able to select the mathematical description discussed in this paper. An important contribution of our work is the use of a hyperbolic tangent to ﬁt the initial growth of all models in both approaches. The use of hyperbolic tangent is presented in where the authors obtain an approximate solution for R(t) in the limit when R0R is small for the SIR model. This condition, sometimes, coincides with the initial growth of outbreaks. Based on this, we show via numerical tests that a hyperbolic tangent can ﬁt not only the SIR model, but also SI and SEIR. We address these successful results by analyzing the representation of the hyperbolic tangent in terms of inﬁnite series. We observe a sum of alternating signs of odd powers describes it. This suggests that the hyperbolic tangent better captures the growth when compared to a power-law representation that uses a single exponent. Additionally, the hyperbolic tangent is deﬁned by exponential functions that preserves a relationship with the EDOs solutions. This combination of characteristics makes the hyperbolic tangent more suitable for simultaneously representing both CA and EDO. 13 The comparison between CA and ODE reveals that both methods oﬀer distinct perspectives for modelling and analysing epidemics, each with its own advantages and limitations. CA, with their discrete approach and ability to simulate local interactions between individuals, provides a detailed view of disease spread within a spatially organized structure. Meanwhile, ODE with their continuous and analytical approach, oﬀers a simpliﬁed and eﬀective overview of the trends and rates of disease spread in large and homogeneous populations. The ability of ODEs to generate analytical or numerical solutions for dynamic systems permits quantitative analysis and the prediction of long-term epidemiological behaviors. To summarise the comparison, we say that CA model described a microscopic level, i.e., individual by individual, while ODE gives the macroscopic description. The use of CA and ODE in epidemiology expands the scope of possible analyses and oﬀers complementary tools that help build a more detailed picture of disease prop- agation dynamics. Our study shed light into the diﬀerences between ODE and CA compartmental epidemiological models. Diﬀerent mathematical approaches can better describe the experimental data of speciﬁc diseases. Therefore, combining these method- ologies can enhance intervention and control strategies, promoting more eﬀective outbreak and pandemic management. In this way, continuous research and develop- ment of these techniques are essential to tackle emerging epidemiological challenges and improve public health policies based on solid evidence.