MirrorVerse: Pushing Diffusion Models to Realistically Reflect the World Ankit Dhiman1,2* Manan Shah1* R Venkatesh Babu1 1Vision and AI Lab, IISc Bangalore 2Samsung R & D Institute India - Bangalore 5 2 0 2 r p A 1 2 ] V C .
s
c [ 1 v 7 9 3 5 1 . 4 0 5 2 : v i X r a .
Our model MirrorFusion , trained on our enhanced dataset SynMirrorV2 surpasses previous state-of-the-art diffusion-based inpainting models at the task of generating mirror reflections.
All images were created by appending the prompt: “A perfect plane mirror reflection of ” to the object description.
All text prompts can be found in the supplementary.
Abstract Diffusion models have become central to various image editing tasks, yet they often fail to fully adhere to physi- cal laws, particularly with effects like shadows, reflections, and occlusions.
In this work, we address the challenge of generating photorealistic mirror reflections using diffusion- based generative models.
Despite extensive training data, existing diffusion models frequently overlook the nuanced details crucial to authentic mirror reflections.
Recent ap- proaches have attempted to resolve this by creating syn- thetic datasets and framing reflection generation as an in- painting task; however, they struggle to generalize across different object orientations and positions relative to the *Equal Contribution.
mirror.
Our method overcomes these limitations by intro- ducing key augmentations into the synthetic data pipeline: random object positioning, randomized rotations, and grounding of objects, significantly enhancing gener- alization across poses and placements.
To further address spatial relationships and occlusions in scenes with multi- ple objects, we implement a strategy to pair objects dur-
ing dataset generation, resulting in a dataset robust enough to handle these complex scenarios.
Achieving generaliza- tion to real-world scenes remains a challenge, so we intro- duce a three-stage training curriculum to develop the Mir- rorFusion  model to improve real-world performance.
We provide extensive qualitative and quantitative evalua- tions to support our approach.
The project page is available at: https://mirror-verse.github.io/. 1 a) SD generations b) HD-Painterc) MirrorFusiond) OursMaska)Input .
Our proposed dataset, SynMirrorV2, surpasses existing mirror datasets in terms of attribute diversity and variability.
While recent work introduced the synthetic SynMirror dataset, it lacks key augmentations and scenario, limiting its performance in complex and real-world settings (See Fig. 1).
Dataset Type Size (#Images) Attributes MSD Mirror-NeRF DLSU-OMRS TROSD PMD RGBD-Mirror Mirror3D Real Real & Synthetic Real
Real Real Real Real SynMirror Synthetic SynMirrorV2 (Ours) Synthetic with Single & Multiple Objects 4,018 9 scenes 454 11,060 6,461 3,049 7,011 198,204 207,610 RGB, Masks RGB, Masks, Multi-View RGB, Mask RGB, Mask RGB, Masks RGB, Depth RGB, Masks, Depth Single Fixed Objects: RGB, Depth, Masks, Normals, Multi-View Single + Multiple Objects: RGB, Depth, Masks, Normals, Multi-View, Augmentations
This limitation stems from the models’ reliance on poorly learned priors, a consequence of the quality and quantity of their training data.
The scarcity of high-quality, real- world images featuring mirrors and their reflections, as ev- idenced in Tab. 1, poses a significant challenge.
While re- cent work has attempted to address this issue by train- ing on a synthetic dataset, the results, as illustrated in Fig. 1, suggest that the method’s performance suffers in complex scenes and real-world settings.
We hypothesize that this is due to inherent limitations in the synthetic data generation process and the training dynamics of the model.
To address the shortcomings in the synthetic data gener- ation pipeline, we create an enhanced pipeline incorporat- ing useful augmentations such as randomizing object po- sition and rotation.
We also ensure that the objects are anchored to the ground level in the 3D world.
We ob- serve that this diverse data improves the generalization of a trained model across the pose and position of objects in the scene.
However, it does not generalize to more complex scenes with multiple objects.
To address this, we propose a novel pipeline that places multiple objects in the scene based on their semantic categories, further enhancing the quality and utility of the proposed synthetic dataset.
Draw- ing inspiration from previous works, such as those that have improved the generation quality on various tasks, notably image-editing , multilingual T2I generation
[23, 50, 53] and several others, we aim to leverage the stage-wise train- ing approach that enhanced the results in these methods.
We briefly sum up our contributions as follows: • We propose SynMirrorV2, a large-scale synthetic dataset with diversity in objects and their relative position and orientation in the scene.
•
Further, we create a pipeline to add multiple objects to a scene in SynMirrorV2.
•
We show that with a curriculum strategy of training on SynMirrorV2, a generative method can also generalize to real-world scenes.
We show this generalization capa- bility on the challenging real-world MSD dataset. .
We observe that current state-of-the-art T2I models, SD (top row) and Flux (bottom row), face significant challenges in producing consistent and geometrically accurate re- flections when prompted to generate reflections in the scene.
1.
Introduction In recent years, diffusion-based generative models have re- defined what is possible in fields spanning from image generation to video synthesis, producing impressive re- sults across various applications
[14, 17, 18, 22, 35, 38].
The evolution of these models has been accompanied by a range of methods designed to fine-tune the generation process through conditional inputs, such as edge maps, sketches, depth maps, and segmentation maps [30, 54, 56, 58].
However, there remains a significant gap in their ca- pacity to replicate intricate physical effects—particularly those rooted in the subtlety of real-world physics, includ- ing shadows , specular reflections , and perspective cues .
More challenging still, these techniques struggle to authentically generate mirror reflections, a task requir-
ing a nuanced understanding of light, geometry, and real- ism that current methods do not adequately address.
In this work, we address the question: “Can current methods be fine-tuned to generate plausible mirror reflections?”
We motivate the problem further by providing genera- tions from current text-to-image (T2I) generation models.
We prompt Stable Diffusion  and FLUX with prompts to generate a scene with a mirror reflection.
Fig.
2 shows that these methods fail to generate plausible mir- ror reflections.
Specifically, check the reflection of “teddy- bear” in the generated outputs from both the methods.
Fur- ther, inpainting methods like HD-Painter also fail for this task, as shown in Fig.
1.
A contemporary method called MirrorFusion , claiming to generate mirror reflections, falls short on real-world and challenging scenes as apparent in Fig.
1.
Despite their impressive capabilities, powerful diffusion models struggle to generate mirror reflections accurately.
2
‘A perfect plane mirror reflection of a mug which is placed in front of the mirror.
’’‘A perfect plane mirror reflection of a stuffed toy bear which is placed in front of the mirror.
’’‘A perfect plane mirror reflection of a chair model which is placed in front of the mirror.
’’Stable Diffusion Flux 2.
Related Work 3.
Dataset Image Generative models.
Diffusion models have be- come quite popular for image generation tasks.
Diffusion models work by gradually adding noise to data and then learning to reverse this process to generate data from a vari- ety of distributions
[8, 11, 17].
Subsequent works have ex- panded the scope of image generation by incorporating text guidance
[37, 40] into the diffusion process, simplifying the reverse process , and reformulating diffusion to occur in a latent space for improved speed.
explore ad- vancements in diffusion models by addressing bias through distribution-guided debiasing techniques.
Further, meth- ods [32, 33] are developed to provide more fine-grained generation control to these models.
Building on the success of vision transformers , recent approaches [7, 34, 60] have replaced the U-Net architecture in diffusion models with transformer-based designs, leading to high-quality im- age generation results.
Further, there are popular meth- ods
[2, 22] for high-quality image generation.
However, these methods also fail for the task of generating reflections on the mirror as shown in Fig.
2 Image Inpainting.
Building on the advancements in im- age diffusion models, methods like Palette and Re- paint leverage known regions through the denois- ing process to reconstruct missing parts.
Blended Diffu- sion
[3, 4] refines this approach by replacing noise in un- masked areas with known content but struggles with com- plex scenes and shapes.
Stable-Diffusion Inpainting (SDI) enhances results by fine-tuning the denoiser with noisy latents, masks, and masked images.
Recent methods, such as HD-Painter , PowerPaint , SmartBrush build on SDI with additional training.
Recently, Brush-
Net introduces a plug-and-play architecture that pre- serves unmasked content while improving coherence with textual prompts.
However, Fig.
1 highlights the limitations of these methods in generating reflections on the mirror.
Diffusion Models and 3D concepts.
Recently, LRM based methods predict 3D model from a single image.
Some methods utilize diffusion-based methods to en- able editing of these 3D presentations.
Other diffusion- based methods use synthetic image pairs for 3D-aware image editing.
However, the synthetic-to-real domain gap can limit their applicability.
Further, ObjectDrop trains a diffusion model for object insertion/removal using a coun- terfactual dataset that can handle shadows and specular re- flections.
Sarkar et al. shows that generated images have different geometric features such as shadows and re- flections from the real images.
Upadhyay et al. pro- posed a geometric constraint in the training process to im- prove the perspective cues in the generated images.
Al- chemist provides control over the material properties of an object by proposing an object-centric synthetic dataset with physically-based materials. .
Data Generation Pipeline Fig.
2 highlights the failure of state-of-the-art models in handling the reflection generation task.
MirrorFusion addresses this challenge by proposing a synthetic dataset but struggles in complex scenarios involving multiple ob- jects and real-world scenes ( Fig. 1).
We attribute this limi- tation to the lack of diversity in their dataset.
To mitigate these shortcomings, we introduce SynMirrorV2, a large- scale dataset which significantly expands diversity with var- ied backgrounds, floor textures, objects, camera poses, mir- ror orientation, object positions, and rotations.
Tab. 1 com- pares existing mirror datasets, while Fig.
3 showcases sam- ples from SynMirrorV2.
Object Sources.
We source objects from Objaverse and Amazon Berkeley Objects (ABO) datasets.
Objaverse, a large-scale dataset, contains 800K diverse 3D assets, while ABO contributes 7, 953 common household objects.
To en- sure quality, we refine our selection using a curated list of 64K objects from OBJECT 3DIT and the filtering pro- cedure discussed in , eliminating low-quality textures and sub-par renderings.
After filtering, we get 58, 109 ob- jects from Objaverse.
In total, we utilize 66, 062 objects.
Scene Resources.
To create a realistic scene, we require assets such as a mirror, floor and background.
We cre- ate a plane for the floor and apply diverse textures sourced from CC-textures .
We use HDRI samples provided by PolyHaven to represent the background.
In our exper- iments, we use different kinds of mirrors: full-wall mirrors and tall rectangular mirrors.
For lighting, we position an area-light slightly above and behind the object at a 45◦ an- gle, directing it towards both the object and the mirror.
Object Placement in the scene.
To begin, we fix the mir- ror’s position within the scene as a fixed reference point.
The sampled object is then scaled to fit within a unit cube, ensuring uniformity in size across all objects.
We proceed by sampling the object’s x-y position from a pre-computed region that guarantees both visibility of the object in the mirror and camera.
This pre-computed region is determined by identifying the intersection between the mirror’s viewing frustum and the camera’s viewing frustum.
Once the posi- tion is set, we randomly sample an angle for the object’s rotation around the y-axis to introduce variability.
How- ever, even with these steps, there may be instances where the object appears to float in the air, which can undermine the dataset’s utility.
To address this, we apply a straightfor- ward grounding technique, detailed in the supplementary material.
Together, these strategies contribute to the diver- sity and overall quality of the proposed dataset.
Multiple Objects.
A typical scene includes multiple ob- jects arranged in varied layouts, producing a range of depth and occlusion scenarios that enhance scene realism.
To 3 .
Dataset Generation Pipeline.
Our dataset generation pipeline introduces key augmentations such as random positioning, rotation, and grounding of objects within the scene using the 3D-Positioner.
Additionally, we pair objects in semantically consistent combinations to simulate complex spatial relationships and occlusions, capturing realistic interactions for multi-object scenes.
Algorithm 1 Procedure to Render Multiple Objects Require: Input 3D model M1 1: Function GETPAIREDOBJECTCATEGORY(M ) 2: c ← GetSemanticCategory(M )
3: L ← GetPairedCategoriesList(c) 4: cpaired ← SampleCategory(L) 5: return cpaired 6: Function SAMPLEOBJECT(c) 7: Lobj ← GetListObjects(c) 8: M ← Sample3DObject(Lobj) 9: return M 10: Main Algorithm 11: cpaired ← GETPAIREDOBJECTCATEGORY(M1) 12: M2 ← SAMPLEOBJECT(cpaired) 13:
Initialize position of M2 at X 14: while M2 collides with M1 do 15: 16: X ← Tr 17: end while Tr ← SampleRandomPosition() capture this complexity, our dataset incorporates scenes with multiple objects, as described in Algorithm 1.
We start by sampling K objects from the original ABO dataset and identifying each object’s class from .
Categories are manually paired to ensure semantic coherence—for in- stance, pairing a chair with a table.
During rendering, af- ter positioning and rotating the primary object K1, an addi- tional object K2 from the paired category is sampled and ar- ranged to prevent overlap, ensuring distinct spatial regions within the scene.
This process yields 3,140 scenes featuring diverse object configurations and spatial relationships, pro- viding a robust foundation for realistic scene representation.
4 Rendering.
Following scene composition, we randomly sample three camera poses from a predefined list of 19 cam- era positions and render each scene using BlenderProc to obtain RGB, depth, normal, and semantic label outputs.
All renderings are produced at a resolution of 512×512 pix- els.
We set the “cycles rendering” parameter to 1024, which is necessary for accurately capturing reflections.
Represen-
tative samples are provided in Fig.
3 and additional exam- ples are available in the supplementary material.
4.
Method Preliminaries Diffusion models are generative models that can construct data samples by progressively remov- ing noise.
In the forward diffusion process, Gaussian noise ϵ ∼ N (0, 1) is incrementally added to an initial clean sam- ple x0 over T timesteps to create a noisy sample xT .
In the reverse process, a clean image x0 is reconstructed by iteratively denoising xT .
This denoising process is carried out by a denoising network ϵθ which is conditioned on the timestep t ∈ {1, T } and optional additional conditioning c (e.g. text prompts, inpainting masks).
Training loss of the denoiser is as follows: LDM = Ex0,ϵ∼N (0,I),t||ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t, c) ||2 Model Architecture.
Building upon MirrorFusion , we also formulate this task as an inpainting task.
Our model employs a base dual branch network similar to Brush-
Net and additionally uses depth map conditioning for the condition branch of BrushNet.
In particular, we con- catenate the noisy latent zt, masked image zm, inpainting mask xm and depth map xd, and provide this as an input to Cycles Renderer3D-PositionerSceneCompositorFloor TexturesHDRIs3D ObjectsSampled Camera Posea)b)Mirrors .
Comparison on MirrorBenchV2.
The baseline fails to maintain accurate reflections and spatial consistency, showing (a) incorrect chair orientation and (b) distorted reflections of multiple objects.
In contrast, our method correctly renders (a) the chair and (b) the sofas with accurate position, orientation, and structure, demonstrating superior performance. .
Comparison on GSO dataset.
In (a), the base- line method misrepresents object structure, while our method pre- serves spatial integrity and produces realistic reflections.
In (b), the baseline yields incomplete and distorted reflections of the mug, whereas our approach generates accurate geometry, color, and de- tail, showing superior performance on out-of-distribution objects.
the conditioning U-Net branch.
Each layer of the generation U-Net ϵi is conditioned with the corresponding layer of the conditioning U-Net ϵ with the help of zero-convolutions (Z) as follows: ′ (cid:16)
′ (cid:17) ϵ ϵθ (zt, t, c)i = ϵθ (zt, t, c)i+w·Z θ ([zt, zm, xm, xd] , t)i w is the preservation scale to adjust the influence of condi- tioning.
We set w to be  for all our experiments.
We, train the model with the loss in Eq. .
Training details.
We follow a 3 stage training curriculum to improve the generalization of the model on real-world scenes.
We utilize the AdamW optimizer with a learn- ing rate of 1e−5 and a batch size of 4 per GPU.
We train on 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs in all stages.
•
Stage 1.
In the first stage, we initialize the weights of both the conditioning and generation branch with the Sta- ble Diffusion v checkpoint and finetune the model on the single object train split of our proposed SynMirrorV2.
In contrast to , we do not keep the generation branch frozen and train the model till 40, 000 iterations.
The variation in the position and rotation in the SynMirrorV2 compared to SynMirror allows us to train the model for longer iterations without any degradation in the genera- tion quality compared to .
•
Stage 2.
In the second stage, we finetune the model for 10, 000 iterations on the multiple objects train split of SynMirrorV2 to incorporate the concepts of occlusions as present in realistic scenes.
•
Stage 3.
We propose a third stage training on real-world data from the MSD dataset for another 10, 000 it- erations to bridge the domain gap between synthetic and real-world image inpainting.
In the first two stages, we use ground truth depth maps and for the third stage, we generate depth maps using a 5 monocular depth estimator .
To enhance learning and reduce reliance on text prompts, we randomly drop them 20% of the time during training, enabling the model to uti- lize depth information better.
Inference.
During inference, we use a CFG value of  and utilize the UniPC scheduler for 50 time steps.
During inference, we allow the user to provide the mask depicting the mirror and estimate the input depth map using Depth-
Pro by passing the masked image as input.
5. Experiments & Results We discuss the evaluation strategy and compare our current method with the previous state-of-the-art method, Mirror- Fusion , referring to this as the baseline.
Additionally, we also provide ablation studies on different design choices in Sec. .
Dataset.
Compared to MirrorBench, MirrorBenchV2 con-
sists of renderings of single and multiple objects in a scene.
Additionally, we qualitatively test our method on several images from the MSD dataset and renderings from the Google Scanned Objects(GSO) dataset.
For single ob- ject renderings, we have a total of 2, 991 images, which come from categories that are both seen and unseen dur- ing training.
We create 300 images that contain two objects from the ABO dataset in the same scene to test the model on generating reflections for multiple objects.
Metrics.
We benchmark various methods on the quality of the generated reflection and textual alignment of the gener- ated image with the input prompt.
•
Reflection Generation Quality.
We evaluate reflection quality using Peak-Signal-to-Noise ratio (PSNR), Struc- tural Similarity (SSIM) and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) on the masked mirror re- gion.
(a)(b)MirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOurs(a)(b)MirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOurs .
Results on MirrorBenchV2.
We compare our method with the baseline MirrorFusion on MirrorBenchV2.
The baseline method shown struggles with pose variations, even in single-object scenes, and fails to produce accurate reflections for multiple objects.
In contrast, our method handles variations in the object orientation effectively and generates geometrically accurate reflections, even in complex, multi-object scenarios.
• Text Alignment.
We use CLIP Similarity for assess- ing textual alignment.
Qualitative results on MirrorBenchV2.
In Fig. 4 (a), a single chair that is slightly rotated is placed in front of a mirror.
We observe that the baseline method completely misrepresents the chair’s orientation in the generated reflec- tion as seen in the mirror.
Notice the zoomed-in region where the reflection appears as if the object was cut and pasted onto the mirror.
In contrast, MirrorFusion  trained on SynMirrorV2 accurately captures the chair’s orientation in the reflection, as shown in the zoomed-in region high- lighted by the green circle.
Fig. 4 (b), shows a scene with a white sofa rotated and placed to the right of a gray sofa.
The baseline method pro- duces two artifacts in the reflection: 1) the gray sofa ap- pears to be floating in the air, and 2) the generated reflec- tion of the white sofa is completely incorrect.
In contrast, our method accurately generates the scene in the reflection.
These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our augmen- tation strategies, as described in Sec. 3.
We show more ex- amples with both single and multiple objects in Fig.
6.
Qualitative results on GSO .
We further evaluate the generalization ability of MirrorFusion  on real-world scanned objects from GSO, shown in Fig.
5. MirrorFusion  generates significantly more accurate and realistic re- flections.
For instance, in Fig. 5 (a), MirrorFusion  cor- rectly reflects the drawer handles (highlighted in green), while the baseline model produces an implausible reflection (highlighted in red).
Likewise, for the “White-Yellow mug” in Fig. 5 (b), MirrorFusion  delivers a convincing geom- etry with minimal artifacts, unlike the baseline, which fails to accurately capture the object’s geometry and appearance.
Qualitative results on the Real-World MSD dataset.
MirrorFusion  performs well on MirrorBenchV2 and real-world objects from GSO but struggles with complex scenes, such as cluttered cables on a table and reflections across multiple mirrors (see Fig. 7).
To improve coher- ence, we fine-tune it on a subset of the MSD dataset and 6 InputInputMirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOursSingle ObjectsMultiple Objects .
Real World Scenes.
We show results for MirrorFusion , our method and our method fine-tuned on the MSD dataset.
We observe that our method can generate reflections capturing the intricacies of complex scenes, such as a cluttered cable on the table and the presence of two mirrors in a 3D scene.
test it on a held-out split, enhancing its ability to handle real-world scenarios.
As shown in Fig. 7, this fine-tuning enables high-fidelity reflections, accurately capturing de- tails like the “black cable” on the table and the “towel” in both mirrors.
These results demonstrate how our dataset im- proves diffusion models, enabling more realistic reflections in challenging settings.
Fig. 7 illustrates further examples on the real-world MSD dataset.
Quantitative results with baselines.
For evaluating the metrics, we generate images using four seeds for a particu- lar prompt and select the image that has the best SSIM score on the unmasked region.
For a particular metric, we report the average value across MirrorBenchV2 by averaging the metric for all the selected images.
Tabs. 2 and 3 show that .
Single Object Reflection Generation Quality.
We com- pare the quantitative results between the baseline and MirrorFu- sion  on the single object split of MirrorBenchV2.
The best results are shown in bold.
This shows the effectiveness of the dataset by achieving improved scores.
Metrics Models Reflection Generation Quality Text Alignment PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ CLIP Sim ↑ baseline Ours 40k         our method outperforms the baseline method and finetuning on multiple objects improves the results on complex scenes.
7 MirrorFusionOursOurs - FTMirrorFusionOursOurs - FT .
Multiple Object Reflection Generation Quality.
We compare the quantitative results between MirrorFusion  trained without multiple objects and MirrorFusion  trained with multi- ple objects on the multiple object split of MirrorBenchV2.
The best results are shown in bold.
This shows the effectiveness of finetuning further on multiple objects.
Metrics Reflection Generation Quality Text Alignment Models PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ CLIP Sim ↑ Ours 40k
Ours 50k         .
Comparison with SDI+Depth baseline.
We observe color leakage issues in “SDI+Depth” generations.
A dual-branch architecture proves to be a better choice, yielding superior out- comes. .
Impact of adding multiple objects.
We observe that training without multiple objects leads to (a) poor reflection gen- eration and (b) artifacts like object blending, supporting the need for finetuning the model on such scenarios.
User study.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed strategy, we also conducted a user study where we provided users with 40 different samples containing single, multiple, GSO objects, and real-world generations from the baseline and MirrorFusion .
84% of users preferred generations from MirrorFusion  over the baseline method.
We provide more details in Appendix D.5.
Limitations.
Fig.
10 illustrates examples where our method accurately captures overall geometry but introduces minor artifacts which can be easily addressed by synthesizing ad- ditional training data and fine-tuning the model. .
Ablation Studies Impact of multiple objects dataset.
To evaluate the im- pact of adding multiple objects to our dataset, we com- pare MirrorFusion  with ( “+ multiple”) and without (“- multiple”) object training in Fig.
8.“
MirrorFusion -w/o multiple” struggles to generate plausible mirror reflections, as evident in Fig.
8 (b), where the bed and sofa appear to blend together.
In contrast,“ MirrorFusion -with multi- ple” accurately captures the spatial relationships between objects within the mirror reflection.
These results highlight the importance of including multiple objects in the dataset, enabling the model to learn spatial relationships and effec- tively handle occlusions.
Ablation on architecture.
To further validate our architec- tural choice, we adapt Stable Diffusion Inpainting to accept depth maps as input similar to the changes made for Mir- rorFusion  and train this modified model on our pro- 8 .
Limitations.
Our method performs well in multi-object scenes (more than two objects) but retains some artifacts, which can be reduced by synthesizing the dataset through the proposed data-generation pipeline and further increasing the diversity and scale.
posed dataset referring to it as “SDI+Depth”.
We com- pare “SDI+Depth” with MirrorFusion  in Fig.
9.
While “SDI+Depth” accurately positions objects in the mirror, it suffers from significant artifacts, including color leakage in contrast to MirrorFusion .
We suspect that this happens due to the early combination of the noisy latent features, mask, and conditioning information in the initial convolu- tion layer, restricting later layers from accessing clean fea- tures.
These findings suggest that a dual branch architecture to provide the conditioning information separately as done in MirrorFusion  is a better choice.
6. Conclusion We introduce SynMirrorV2, a novel large-scale synthetic dataset designed to advance mirror reflection generation significantly.
By employing targeted data augmentations, we achieved robust variability in object pose, position, and occlusion, alongside the ability to handle multi-object scenes.
Our qualitative and quantitative evaluations demon- strate SynMirrorV2’s efficacy in reflection generation, with promising generalization to real-world scenes using cur- riculum training.
This dataset holds substantial potential for driving progress in various mirror-related tasks.
Future re- search will explore advanced data augmentation techniques to enhance real-world performance further.
Acknowledgment.
We are grateful to the Kotak IISc AI- ML Center for providing the computing resources.
We thank Rishubh Parihar for their valuable feedback and Lokesh R. Boregowda for their valuable guidance.
(a)(b)-multiple+ multiple (Ours)-multiple+ multiple (Ours)(a)(b)SDI+Depth OursSDI+DepthOursGTGeneratedGenerationGround-TruthGenerationGround-Truth