Live : Learning Video LLM with Streaming Speech Transcription at Scale Joya Chen1∗ Ziyun Zeng1∗ 1Show Lab, National University of Singapore Yiqi
Lin1∗ Wei Li2
2ByteDance Zejun Ma2 Mike Zheng Shou1(cid:66) 5 2 0 2 r p A 2 2 ] V C .
s
c [ 1 v 0 3 0 6 1 . 4 0 5 2 : v i X r a .
LiveCC provides real-time commentary for streaming video, emulating a human commentator.
This example is drawn from the YouTube video (ID: I7pTpMjqNRM), featuring the Paris 2024 Olympics Men’s Basketball Final between France and the USA.
Our 7B model generates continuous commentary with a latency of less than  seconds per frame, supporting real-time applications at 2 FPS.
Abstract Recent video large language models (Video LLMs)
of- ten depend on costly human annotations or proprietary model APIs (e.g., GPT-4o) to produce training data, which limits their training at scale.
In this paper, we ex-
plore large-scale training for Video LLM with cheap au- tomatic speech recognition (ASR) transcripts.
Specifi-
cally, we propose a novel streaming training approach that densely interleaves the ASR words and video frames according to their timestamps.
Compared to previous studies in vision-language representation with ASR, our method naturally fits the streaming characteristics of ASR, thus enabling the model to learn temporally-aligned, fine- grained vision-language modeling.
To support the train- ing algorithm, we introduce a data production pipeline to process YouTube videos and their closed captions (CC, same as ASR), resulting in Live-CC-5M dataset for pre- training and Live-WhisperX-526K dataset for high- quality supervised fine-tuning (SFT).
Remarkably, even (cid:66)Corresponding Author.
*Equal Contribution.
without SFT, the ASR-only pre-trained LiveCC-7B-Base model demonstrates competitive general video QA perfor- mance and exhibits a new capability in real-time video commentary.
To evaluate this, we carefully design a new LiveSports-3K benchmark1, using LLM-as-a-judge to measure the free-form commentary.
Experiments show our final LiveCC-7B-Instruct model can surpass ad- vanced 72B models (Qwen-VL-72B-Instruct, LLaVA- Video-72B) in commentary quality even working in a real- time mode.
Meanwhile, it achieves state-of-the-art results at the 7B/8B scale on popular video QA benchmarks such as VideoMME and OVOBench, demonstrating the broad gen- eralizability of our approach.
All resources of this paper have been released at showlab.github.io/livecc.
1.
Introduction The success of large language models (LLMs)
[3, 4, 22, 62, 63, 78, 79, 91] owes much to the large-scale auto-regressive 1Welcome to participate the real-time video commentary competition at CVPR25 workshop loveucvpr25/track2.
Free GPT-4o judging provided.
1 Time2s1s3s4s5sHi LiveCC, could you commentate onthis match in real time?Time125s124s126s127s128sTheFrench have the ball.
They're trailing bytwo.
They're looking to get thelead.
Here’s the pass.
He is going to shot.
Doubleteam defense by French.
They're going to have to get it up.
Here’sCurry.
He's got to get a shot up.
Curry.
Step back.
Three-pointer.
Got it!
Curry!As a Video LLM trained with millionsof streaming speechtranscripts, I can provide play-by-play commentary.
language pre-training [8, 31, 36, 69, 70].
This inspires large multimodal models (LMMs)
[5, 29, 54, 64, 112], which are initially only achieved by small-scale instruction tun-
ing
[54, 112], to increasingly emphasize data scaling dur-
ing their training.
While early large multimodal models (LMMs) such as LLaVA were only supervised fine- tuned on 158K image QA samples, recent advanced ap- proaches
[16, 42, 50, 59, 105] have expanded the training data to millions of multimodal conversation samples, sub- stantially benefiting from the increased data size.
A long-term ambition in this field is to develop LMMs akin to J.A.R.V.I.S., seamlessly assisting humans in real-life scenarios.
Building on prior successes in LLMs/LMMs, a possible way is to collect extensive streaming video- text chat data.
For instance, recordings of a basketball coach providing real-time feedback to a novice player could be great data for training.
However, previous studies on streaming video LLMs [13, 24, 25, 55, 67, 68, 82, 83, 86, 98, 100, 111] have explored the difficulties of collect- ing and scaling up such data.
They either rely on LLMs to generate “hallucinated” streaming conversations from video annotations, or fine-tune on small-scale dense caption datasets
[32, 37, 110].
Neither approach is scalable enough to yield a truly powerful streaming video LLM.
To address these limitations, two primary approaches merit consideration.
First, recent video-text datasets
[14, 15, 81, 105] increasingly employ advanced LMMs, such as GPT-4o , for synthetic data generation.
While effec- tive, this approach is costly and risks violating usage terms.
Another alternative leverages the inherent audio channel in videos by utilizing automatic speech recognition (ASR) transcriptions as textual data.
Prior works [60, 88–90, 96] have explored large-scale video-ASR learning but typically treat ASR transcriptions as global video captions, overlook- ing their valuable temporal alignment.
In practice, some ASR texts naturally synchronize with visual content, offer- ing an untapped opportunity for video-language learning, escepically for streaming applications.
In this work, we aim to scale video LLM training by ASR transcriptions.
We propose a novel streaming training approach that densely interleaves ASR words with corre- sponding video frames, as illustrated in .
The model is trained to generate frame assigned ASR words in an au- toregressive manner.
This approach marks a significant de- parture from prior LMMs [5, 13, 54, 111, 112], which pri- marily learn from complete sentences or paragraphs.
In contrast, our method simply learns the native short, incom- plete ASR word sequences that are temporally aligned with video frames.
This offers three key advantages: 1) it aligns naturally with the real-world data, making it readily applica- ble to video platforms like YouTube; 2) it enables the model to learn fine-grained temporal correlations between visual content and spoken language; and 3) during inference, it fa- cilitates seamless streaming by generating only a few words per frame, ensuring extremely low latency.
To achieve this goal, we address three fundamental chal- lenges: 1) How can video-ASR data be effectively cu- rated and selected for training?
2) How should video-ASR streaming sequences be efficiently modeled?
3) How can streaming word generation—termed real-time video com- mentary—be rigorously evaluated?
To tackle these chal- lenges, we first design a data collection pipeline that inte- grates cost-effective techniques to enhance ASR quality and improve visual-text alignment, such as active speaker detec- tion for filtering low-quality talking-head videos.
This pipeline enables the construction of the Live-CC-5M pre- training set and the Live-WhisperX-526K SFT set.
Next, we incorporate our streaming pre-training approach into the Qwen2-VL-7B-Base base model, yielding LiveCC- 7B-Base, and investigate key factors influencing accurate ASR word prediction, such as leveraging video title and previous ASR as context to mitigate the learning ambiguity.
Then, we introduce LiveSports-3K, a new benchmark that employs the LLM-as-a-judge framework for evaluat- ing real-time video commentary.
We fine-tune LiveCC-7B on Live-WhisperX-526K and LLaVA-Video-178K to obtain LiveCC-7B-Instruct, achieving state-of-the-art per- formance on general QA and streaming commentary tasks.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our streaming pre-training approach on Live-CC-5M substantially en- hances commentary quality and yields improvements in general video QA performance.
By fine-tuning our pre- trained model using the Live-WhisperX-526K dataset in conjunction with LLaVA-Video-178K, our method achieves state-of-the-art results on popular video QA benchmarks such as Video-MME and OVOBench , as well as our proposed LiveSports-3K benchmark, and delivers com- petitive performance on MVBench .
These results in- dicate that our comprehensive framework is not only for real-time video commentary but also beneficial to common video understanding capability.
2. Related Work Large Multimodal Models.
Early LMMs [2, 20, 43, 54, 112] achieve image dialogue by projecting the visual em- bedding (e.g., from CLIP
[71, 97]) to align with LLM token embedding space.
Then, lots of efforts explore more free- form interleaved vision-text chatting [3, 5, 40, 42, 50, 53, 64, 93], spatial/temporal grounding [12, 38, 52, 74, 80, 95, 104], video comprehension
[24, 27, 29, 44, 48, 57, 75, 77, 90, 99, 106], etc.
Our model is also an LMM, but it offers new insights into cost-effective and scalable ASR training data, as well as a new capability of real-time video com- mentary.
Training Video LLMs.
Popular video LLMs
[6, 16, 80, 98, 106] typically rely on human- or LLM-crafted video 2 .
LiveCC data production pipeline.
We begin by inte- grating several large-scale YouTube video datasets
[60, 88, 89, 96, 105], followed by metadata filtering, resulting in a curated pool of M videos.
Then, the pre-training dataset is built using the orig- inal YouTube CC, while the SFT dataset leverages higher-quality ASR transcriptions generated by WhisperX
[7, 72].
We also intro- duce a set of efficient filtering techniques to improve the SFT data quality.
Please refer to Section  for details.
caption/QA sequences for training.
In contrast, our work focuses on training less explored ASR transcription data, leveraging its scalability and automatic extraction capabil- ities.
Several studies [51, 60, 88–90, 96] have investigated learning spatio-temporal representations through video- ASR pre-training.
The most related work is Vid2Seq , which pre-trains a model to predict timestamped ASR para- graph for videos.
However, its training paradigm still aligns with previous video captioning, aiming to predict an overall event.
In contrast, our approach aligns with the streaming ASR, learning to predict short, incomplete ASR words per frame causally, thereby enabling more fine-grained spatial- temporal learning.
Streaming Video Understanding.
Traditional video un-
derstanding benchmarks
[1, 10, 11, 28, 30, 34, 39, 58, 85] allow models to access entire video frames before mak- ing predictions, a setting commonly referred to as “of- fline”.
However, this paradigm does not align well with many real-time applications (e.g., AR glasses).
Previous online video understanding tasks, such as online action de- tection [26, 107, 108], localization
[9, 35, 76], and caption- ing , primarily focus on densely identifying current or future actions.
Recent advancements in streaming video LLMs
[13, 24, 25, 55, 67, 68, 82, 83, 98, 111] and bench- marks
[33, 46, 49, 86] have introduced capabilities such as proactive response, long-form streaming, and interactive multimodal conversation.
However, they heavily rely on manual or GPT crafted data, and will be “blind” for video input before the text/audio generation finished.
Our work provides a comprehensive solution that leverages ASR data to enhance both general QA and streaming capabilities, and .
Overview of our proposed Live-CC-5M dataset.
achieves novel real-time video commentary feature, along with a new benchmark LiveSports-3K-CC for evaluation.
3. Methodology .
Video-ASR Data Curation To demonstrate the scalability of our pre-training strategy, we aggregate four recent large-scale video datasets–HD- VILA , YT-Temporal-1B , VidChapters , and HowTo100M –as our video sources.
As illustrated in , we begin by retrieving video metadata (e.g., title, duration, category) and the corresponding YouTube closed captions (CC) using the released video IDs.
To ensure high visual quality, we retain only videos with a resolution of at least 480p.
For storage efficiency, we filter videos to be between 30 seconds and 10 minutes in length.
We further require the presence of both CC and title metadata.
Ad- ditionally, we observe that English videos typically yield better ASR quality; therefore, we restrict our selection to English-language content.
Applying these filtering criteria results in a curated set of  million YouTube video IDs.
YT-CC-Source-M. We further observed that YouTube metadata often mislabels the language category, e.g., mark- ing videos as English despite containing code-mixed con- tent or garbled characters.
To address this, we ap- ply the XLM-RoBERTa (papluca/xlm-roberta-base- language-detection) for English detection, using a confi- dence threshold of .
In addition, we discard video IDs with sparse CC, e.g. music videos with only a few words.
We require each video to contain at least 30 distinct words in its CC.
Applying these filters, we download these  mil- lion videos with English CC, which serves as the source for both pre-training and SFT datasets.
YT-CC-Source-M→Live-CC-5M. Upon inspection, we observed that YouTube CC is generally of low quality– lacking punctuation, case-insensitive, and frequently con- taining garbled characters.
Nevertheless, due to their ac- cessibility and low cost, they offer a scalable data source, 3 >=480P>=30s<=10minLanguage=EnCC&Title existIn EvaluationYTVideo IDCollectionHD-VILAYT-Temporal-1B Vid-ChaptersHowTo100MLLaVA178K-20241.
Metadata FilteringDownload CC2.
Video-levelCCFilteringM IDsEnglish detection>= Word set length >= 30Download Video&CCM IDsYT-CC-MSourceYT-CC-MSource30~60s/240s clippingWord-wise interspace <= 3s1 <
= Word speed <= 4A1.
Video ClippingB2.
Better ASRB1.
7CategoriesB3.
Video to ClipsWhisperX large-v3-turbo HowTo, Sci, Edu, Autos Sports, Gaming, News MVideosB5.
Remove Talking-headFor Scale Ablation StudiesB4.
Pure Text Filtering30s~240s clippingWord-wise interspace <= 3s1 <= Word speed <= MClipsQwen2-B-Instruct <= Loss <= MVideosMClipsLight-ASD + SCRFDASD ratio <= B6.
Make PromptLive-WhisperX-526K30~240s ClipsSFT Dataset526KClipsMClipsGPT-4o evaluatesqualityandmakepromptLive-CC-5M 30~240s ClipsLive-CC-1//5/10M 30~60s ClipsA4.Pre-training SetQwen2-B-Instruct <= Loss <= Qwen2-VL-2B-Instruct8frames to judgePre-training Data PipelineSFT Data PipelineA2.
Pure Text FilteringA3.
Remove Talking-head 16M 30~240
Clips31M 30~60 Clips15M ClipsM Clips making them more suitable for pre-training rather than SFT.
Therefore, we design the following steps for data cura- tion: A1)
First, we segment the video based on ASR word timestamp gaps.
If the gap between words exceeds 3 sec- onds, a new clip is generated.
If a clip exceeds the maxi- mum length, it is split into a new clip.
Clips shorter than 30 seconds or with a speech rate outside the 1 to 4 words per second range are discarded.
The extended range of si- lence or abnormal speech speed makes it hard for the model to learn the end-of-sequence (EOS) predictions.
For pre- training, the default maximum clip length is set to 240 sec- onds.
For ablation studies, the clip length is set to 60 sec- onds for training efficiency.
We rank these clips by their word set size, which reflects content informativeness, and create pre-training subsets with 1M, M, 5M, and 10M clips.
A2)
We compute the pure text loss of ASR transcripts by language model to assess their dependency on visual content.
A very low perplexity suggests the transcript is self-contained and does not require visual grounding, while a very high perplexity often correlates with poor ASR qual- ity.
Empirically, we use Qwen2-B-Instruct to retain samples with loss values in the range of  to ; A3) To remove videos with people consistently facing the camera and talking without meaningful visual information, we ap- ply visual filtering using Qwen-VL-2B-Instruct .
For each video, we use 8 uniformly sampled frames to detect persistent face-speaking content by prompting Qwen-VL- 2B-Instruct.
We keep the videos if the model’s confidence in detecting the talking head is below a threshold of .
Finally, we obtain Live-CC-5M for pretraining.
shows the statistics of these data samples.
YT-CC-Source-M→Live-WhisperX-526K. As the low-quality YouTube CC makes them unsuitable for SFT data, we further perform the following steps to obtain high-quality, visually grounded ASR transcription: B1)
We only maintain 7 YouTube categories shown in a but filter out “People & Blogs” and “Film & Animation”, as their ASR content typically lacks correspondence with the visual events; B2) We employ WhisperX
[7, 72] (large-v3-turbo) to generate more accurate, word- level aligned ASR transcriptions; B3)
Similar to Step A1, the maximum clip length is 240 seconds.
For pretraining, since pre-ASR provides context, clips can be split in the middle of sentences.
However, during the instruction fine-tuning stage, where no pre-ASR context is available, we ensure that each clip begins at the start of a sentence.
Specifically, the last ASR word must be a period, question mark, or exclamation mark, and the current clip must start with a capital letter; B4)
The same as Step A2, while the range of text perplexity is  to 5; B5) Despite the above filtering steps like Step A3, we observe that many remaining videos are dominated by talking-head content, which is often useless for training real-time video (a) Statistics of our proposed Live-WhisperX-526K dataset.
(b) An example of ASD removal in SFT data pipeline.
(c) An example from the Live-WhisperX-526K dataset. .
Overview of the Live-WhisperX-526K dataset.
commentary.
To address this, we employ active speaker detection (ASD) to identify and exclude such videos.
For efficiency, we optimize Light-ASD pipeline in face detection, tracking, and multiprocessing, achieving a 250× speed-up.
As a result, processing a 5-minute video now takes only 1– seconds.
An ASD removel example is in b. B6)
Since these ASR transcripts lack associated user prompts, we employ GPT-4o to generate a prompt for each sample.
The prompts are crafted to match the style and intent of the speech transcription without revealing specific content.
With this prompt, we no longer need pre-ASR applied during SFT.
Finally, we get a high-quality SFT dataset comprising 526K video clips, each paired with word-level timestamped ASR transcripts and a user prompt.
c shows an example in Live-WhisperX-526K dataset. .
Modeling Training with Dense Interleaving Sequence.
As shown in , our model architecture builds upon Qwen2- VL , which integrates a Vision Transformer with basic dynamic resolution support and uses Qwen2 as 4 Remove ASD (e.g. Talking-head) ClipsMaintain non-ASD ClipsPrompt: Can you provide a step-by-step guide on how to create a special visual effect using Photoshop?Text Stream: …[s-s, “link”], [s-s, “it”], [s-s, “in”], [s-s, “the”], [s-s, “description”], [s-s, “and”], [s-s, "I've"], [s-s, "also"], [s-s, "got"], [s-s, "an"], [s-s, "ice"], [s-s, "image"]…Video Stream .
Modeling Overview of LiveCC.
The model processes streaming video frames through a visual encoder to produce visual tokens while assigning ASR text from corresponding frame intervals as text tokens.
The LLM autoregressively predicts text tokens within this densely interleaved token sequence.
To mitigate learning ambiguity, additional context of preceding ASR text or video title is provided during pre-training.
During SFT, the context part is only user query to match the real-world applications.
the LLM backbone.
We adopt the base version of Qwen2- VL, which is pretrained extensively on image-text data but has limited exposure to video-text pairs.
Following stan- dard practice , the model is trained to autoregressively predict text tokens while treating visual tokens as non- predictive inputs, as illustrated in .
Unlike existing approaches that use either captioning or image-text in- terleaving style input, we propose to densely interleave ASR words with video frames along the temporal dimen- sion.
The training sequence is formatted as, [Con]<Ft:t+k><Wt:t+k><Ft+k:t+2k><Wt+k:t+2k> ...<Ft+n∗k:
t+(n+1)∗k><Wt+n∗k:t+(n+1)∗k>, where [Con] denotes context information of the video (e.g., prompt, previous ASR, video title), <F> denotes a frame, <W> denotes the words, t represents the time index and k represents the time intervals.
By default, we use 2 FPS frame rate and k = 1 as the time interval.
We in- corporate video titles and preceding ASR text as contextual information to enhance text coherence, since ASR text may start from the middle of a sentence, or use informal, verbal language.
A newline character concatenates the video title and previous ASR texts if the ASR texts are available.
Sequence Pre-processing.
For pre-training, we utilize the original YouTube ASR transcripts, which employ fixed timestamps to segment speech into chunks of approximately 2 to 3 seconds.
To approximate word-level alignment, we uniformly distribute each segment’s duration across its con- stituent words.
This heuristic yields reasonably accurate word-level timestamps across the entire video.
In contrast, during SFT, we leverage WhisperX, which provides precise word-level timestamps, as detailed in Section .
To dis- ambiguate the true end-of-sequence (EOS) from temporary pauses in streaming, we simply use the ellipsis token (“ ...”) as an special EOS indicator appended to the per-frame text tokens.
For silent frames without corresponding subtitles, we directly predict this ellipsis token.
Training Strategy.
Our model training incorporates two stages including pre-training and SFT.
For the pre-training, we solely train the model with dense interleaving se- quences.
The objective is to align frame features with the temporally synchronized ASR words, enabling the model to capture temporal correlations between frames and lan- guage.
Next, to improve the ability of LiveCC models to solve a diverse set of downstream tasks, we jointly train the model with our Live-WhisperX-526K in streaming mode, general video and image datasets for common caption or QA.
To achieve this, we make the streaming training be compatible with the Qwen2-VL conversation template.
The details can be found in the supplementary material.
Inference.
During inference, our LiveCC model processes input frames sequentially.
To accelerate language decoding, we cache the Key-Value (KV) pairs of previous prompts, visual frames, and generated text.
For long sequences, we discard visual tokens every 240 seconds—consistent with the maximum duration in SFT training—while retaining the text tokens to prefill the model again.
4.
The LiveSports-3K Benchmark .
LiveSports-3K Data Collection
As mentioned in Section 2, we present LiveSports-3K, a comprehensive benchmark designed for systematic eval- uation of video understanding models’ capabilities.
Un- like previous sports benchmarks like SoccerNet and MatchTime , which focus on specific sports, our bench- mark spans a broader range of common sports to en- sure generalizability.
To achieve this, we prompt GPT-4o-
5 00:2000:1900:1800:17Pre-trained LLM2 FPSVIsualTokensText Tokensoh what a nice pass …</e>2
FPSVisual TokensText Tokens2 FPSVisual TokensText Tokens2 FPSVisual TokensTimePrevious ASRas ContextText Tokensand a flip by willie …</e>cawleystein …</e>he’s not gonnamiss …</e>Visual EncoderCasual LM Loss .
(a) Category Distribution of the LiveSports Benchmark:
The benchmark includes 3k live CCs and MCQs, split into two tracks: CC and QA.
(b) Event Duration and ASR Word Count in the CC track: For CC, event duration (left y-axis) and ASR word count (right y-axis) are analyzed, with durations categorized as short, medium, and long.
(c) Question Count by Type in the QA track: Questions are grouped into three query types, with additional tracking of those requiring OCR for each type.
(d) Sample CCs and Query Types.
mini to select the ongoing sports videos and classify sports categories of our Live-WhisperX-526K dataset.
We focused on the top 50 most frequent sports categories and randomly sampled 12 videos from each category, yielding a pool of 600 candidate videos covering popular sports.
After collecting candidate videos, we used GPT-4o-mini to merge ASR transcriptions into semantically coherent events, recording each event’s start and end timestamps.
Given that ASR transcriptions are not always visually rele- vant, we recruited English-proficient annotators to filter out irrelevant events according to three criteria: 1)
The event must last more than 10 seconds; 2) The event clip must contain ongoing sports action; 3) Most ASR transcriptions within the event clip should be visually grounded.
Events that failed to meet any of these criteria were discarded.
We curated 416 videos across 49 sports categories (one cate- gory lack of qualified videos).
The category distribution is shown in (a).
We further remove these videos from our training dataset for fair evaluation. .
Crafting LiveSports-3K-CC/QA LiveSports-3K-CC.
Real-time commentary in sports videos encapsulates rich spatiotemporal semantics.
For instance, the commentary on a football game often de- scribes attackers, defenders, and their interactions in de- tail, making it an ideal source for streaming video under- standing evaluations.
Therefore, we developed this track to assess video comprehension by evaluating the align- ment between model-generated and groundtruth CCs from ASR.
Note that the data collection process has ensured that the ASR event transcriptions are visually grounded.
Thus, we directly leverage ASR transcriptions from quali- fied events as groundtruth.
In summary, LiveSports-3K-CC consists of 1,702 events with high-quality live CCs.
Fig- ure 6(b) presents the distribution of events and word counts in three duration groups, showing a relatively balanced to- tal word count (i.e., video count × word count per group) across groups.
Additionally, (d) illustrates a sam- ple event, demonstrating the highly visual-grounded nature of the ASR-transcribed CCs retained through our filtering criteria.
For evaluation, we prompt the model with the video title and the preceding CCs of the event, then record the model’s predictions.
Given the challenges of directly assessing dis- crepancies between the predicted and groundtruth CCs, we adopt a pairwise comparison approach inspired by Chatbot Arena .
Specifically, for each pair of predictions, we use GPT-4o as a judge to select the better prediction based on the ground-truth CCs.
The selection criteria include both stylistic and semantic consistency.
The winning rates of dif- ferent models serve as the ranking metric.
LiveSports-3K-QA.
LiveSports-3K-CC offers a valuable track for assessing video understanding comprehensively.
However, it still lacks a precise criterion for analyzing model behavior, especially when errors occur.
To address this, we decompose each event into three fundamental el- ements: (i)
When: Captures the temporal context of the event.
(ii)
What: Defines the content or action taking place in the event.
(iii) Who: Identifies the participants involved in the event.
By structuring events around these elements, we enable targeted queries for each element based on the other two, allowing us to isolate specific areas of weak- 6 CyclingCrossFitCricketClimbingBull RidingBrazilian Jiu-JitsuBoxingBowlingBodybuildingBasketballBaseballBMXAthle@csArcheryWrestlingWeightliBingVolleyballTriathlonTrack and FieldTennisSwimmingSurûngSoBballSnowboardingSkiingSkateboardingShoo@ngSailingRunningRugbyRowingPowerliBingPaintballNASCARMountain BikingMotorsportMotorcrossMar@al ArtsMMALacrosseHorse RacingHockeyGymnas@csGolfFootballFitnessFishingFigure Ska@ngEquestrianLiveSportsClass: ArcheryTimelineGroundtruth ASR Closed Cap3on (s-s): So we will stay on the line, just give him the signal to the judge, and then the next one.
LiveSports-CCContext ASR Closed Cap3on (s-s): We are not like the able-bodied game because we are not so convenient to rolling.
Model A Predic3on: That red hat guy is ready.
He ûnished, now its the next one9s turn.
Query Who, Given When and What: Who is shoo@ng when the player No.34B is wai@ng?
[Op@ons A B C D] Answer: A.
The man wearing a red hat.
Query
When, Given Who and What: When did the man wearing a red hat raise his hands?
[Op@ons A B C D] Answer: C. ABer he ûnished shoo@ng.
Query What, Given Who and When: What did the man wearing a red hat do aBer he ûnished shoo@ng?
[Op@ons A B C D] Answer: D. Raise hands.
LiveSports-QA(b) Event Dura3on and ASR Word Count in LiveSports-CC(c) Ques3on Count by Type in LiveSports-QA(d)
Sample Closed Cap3ons in LiveSports-CC and Three Query Types in LiveSports-QA(a)
Category Distribu3on of the LiveSports BenchmarkWord
NumberEvent NumberQues@on Number1,702 Closed Captions1,174 Multiple-Choice QuestionsccQAModel B Predic3on: That man with a red hat is shoo8ng.
Then he raised his hands.
A is be]erLLM Judger Video-ASR Sequence LiveSports-3K-CC Video-MME Win
Rate↑ Overall↑
Short↑ Caption (5M) Streaming (5M) Caption+Streaming (5M×2)          Context None Title Prev.
ASR Title & Prev.
ASR Title || Prev.
ASR LiveSports-3K-CC Win Rate↑ Video-MME Overall↑ Short↑                Data 1M M 5M 10M LiveSports-3K-CC Win Rate↑ Video-MME Overall↑ Short↑             (a) Training Paradigm during Pre-training.
(b) Context during Pre-training.
(c) Pre-training Scalability. .
Ablation Study in the Pre-training Stage.
Blue highlights our default setting.
Win Rate indicates the percentage of wins against GPT-4o-08-06-generated commentary, using ground-truth ASR as the reference.
Models in these table are pre-trained on a maximum of 120 frames (60 seconds at 2 FPS), so we did not show results on medium- and long- length videos for Video-MME to avoid misjudgment.
(a) Both caption-style and streaming-style sequence significantly improve QA performance; however, only the streaming-style sequence yields notable gains in commentary generation.
(b) Incorporating previous ASR enhances both commentary and QA.
In contrast, simply adding video titles degrades QA, unless previous ASR is absent (e.g., during 0–60s).
(c) Commentary benefits from increased pre-training data, while QA performance declines beyond 5M examples—likely due to overtraining on the single-source (streaming ASR) data.
ness that require improvement.
(c) provides de- tailed examples of these three question types.
Additionally, we recorded whether a question required OCR capabilities, allowing for an auxiliary evaluation of model performance on text recognition tasks.
This process yielded 1,236 four- option MCQs across 414 videos, excluding two videos due to the difficulty of designing appropriate questions.
Finally, we manually removed 62 questions that require speech recognition, leaving the remaining 1,174 MCQs as the fi- nal benchmark.
This track includes a balanced distribution of the three query types, with OCR-reliant questions evenly distributed among them, as shown in (b).
5. Experiments .
Experiments Setup Implemetation Details.
We initialize our model with the Qwen2-VL-7B-Base checkpoint , following most of the configurations provided in its HuggingFace release, with minimal modifications to improve efficiency.
Specif-
ically, during ablation studies of pre-training, we reduce the maximum number of frames from 768 to 120 and shorten the visual context length from 128K to 16K to- kens.
During formal pre-training and SFT, we increase the frame limit to 480 and extend the visual context length to 24K, while slightly lowering the minimum spatial resolu- tion from 128 × 28
× 28 to 100 × 28 × 28.
Pre-training ablation studies are conducted on the 30∼60s Live-CC- 1∼10M dataset.
The formal pre-training is in 30∼240s Live-CC-5M.
The SFT stages uses our Live-Whisper-526K and LLaVA-Video-178K datasets (without the train- ing set of ActivityNetQA , Next-QA , and Percep- tionTest ).
We implement the training engine using Py- Torch and Transformers .
The batch size for pre- training and SFT is 512 on 128 GPUs, with a learning rate of 2e-5 for pre-training and 1e-5 for SFT.
Evaluation Protocols and Metrics.
For QA bench- marks, we evaluate our models on VideoMME , MVBench , OVOBench , and our newly introduced LiveSports-3K-QA.
For all models, we calculate the logits of multiple choices to select answers, due to the instruction following capability of streaming ASR pre-trained model has been lost.
We observe this does not make difference with generation-based method for SFT models, but the evaluation is much faster.
The evaluation on LiveSports-3K-CC is like a condi- tioned video captioning task, where the condition comprises the video title and previous ASR text.
With this condition, the model’s task is to complete the ASR text based on the given video clip.
Since most video LLMs lack real-time streaming capabilities, we evaluate them using a general video captioning approach, processing all video clip frames at once.
In contrast, our model supports real-time infer- ence, enabling us to generate captions on a frame-by-frame basis and then concatenate them into a complete response for evaluation.
Due to the challenges of directly assessing open-ended text generation, we employ a pairwise compe- tition approach, similar to Chatbot Arena .
We use In each GPT-4o as the fixed competition opponent.
competition (tested model vs. GPT-4o), we also use GPT- 4o acts as the judge, selecting the response that best aligns both stylistically and semantically with the ground truth ASR transcriptions.
The evaluation metric is the win rate, which is defined as the proportion of times the judge favors our model over the baseline.
The evaluation also in- volves latency comparison, which we discuss in the supple- mentary material. .
Ablation Study Pre-training Paradigm.
We first investigate the impact of different pre-training paradigms on model performance us-
ing the following baselines: Caption, where all ASR text is concatenated and appended after the visual input frames; Streaming, where the model is trained on se- quential frame inputs sampled at 2 FPS, predicting ASR text incrementally after receiving every 2 frames; and Caption+Streaming, where each training sample contributes to both captioning and streaming objectives.
As shown in 7 Pre-training SFT LiveSports-3K CC QA OCR Who When What All Duration S M L Perception VideoMME Recognition Te Sp
At Ac Ob Te Reasoning Sp Ac Ob OCR Count IS Qwen2-VL-7B-Base      LV178K
LV178K+Live526K                                        (a) Ablation study in the SFT data.
Pre-training SFT LiveSports-3K CC QA OCR Who When What All Duration S M L Perception VideoMME Recognition Te Sp
At Ac Ob Te Reasoning Sp Ac Ob OCR Count IS Qwen2-VL-7B-Base - - LiveCC-7B-Base                                             Qwen2-VL-7B-Base
LV178K+Live526K      LV178K+Live526K      LiveCC-7B-Base                                   (b) Ablation study in the SFT model initialization. .
Ablation studies in the SFT stage.
LV178K denotes the datasets used in LLaVA-Video-178K .
Live526K refers to our proposed Live-WhisperX-526K. LiveSports-3K CC denotes the win rate against commentary generated by LLaVA-Video-72B. LiveSports- 3K QA is the overall accuracy includes OCR, Who, When, What questions.
Te, Sp, At, Ac, Ob, IS denotes temporal, spatial, attribute, action, object, information synopsis, respectively.
Model (7B/8B) VideoMME MVBench w/o sub w sub Avg.
OVOBench Avg. RTVP BT FAR Size Model LiveSports-3K ↑ Live?
CC
Overall OCR Who When What LongVA-7B InternVL2-8B LLaVA-OV-7B Oryx-7B mPLUG-Owl3-7B LongVU-7B MiniCPM-v Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct LLaVA-Video-7B LiveCC-7B-Instruct                -     -      -    - - - -         - - - - - - - -     - - - -             .
Comparison of QA accuracy (%) across VideoMME , MVBench , OVOBench .
We only show results before the CVPR 2025 submission period (Nov, 2024).
a, both caption and streaming pre-training achieve strong general video QA performance (exceeding 60) on the Video-MME benchmark , outperforming many exist- ing SFT models.
Notably, the streaming-based pre-training yields significantly better results on the commentary task compared to caption-based pre-training, highlighting the ef- fectiveness of our proposed paradigm.
Context Input for Pre-training.
In b, we observe that providing contextual information, particularly the pre- vious ASR text, significantly improves commentary gen- eration.
This improvement stems from the fact that a 60- second segment can break the continuity of ASR, making it difficult to interpret the current segment without prior con- text.
While incorporating the video title as additional con- text offers benefits on commentary, it slightly degrades per- formance on VideoMME.
We attribute this to potential in- formation leakage, which may make training easier.
To han- dle the cases where no previous ASR is available (e.g., clips at the beginning of a video), we adopt a hybrid strategy: “Title || Prev. ASR”, which includes the video title only when previous ASR is unavailable.
This approach strikes the best balance between enhancing commentary generation - GPT-4o-08-06 Gemini--Pro 72B Qwen2-VL-72B-Instruct VideoLLaMA-2-72B LLaVA-OV-72B Qwen-VL-72B-Instruct LLaVA-Video-72B ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗      7B Qwen2-VL-7B-Instruct Qwen-VL-7B-Instruct InternLM-XC-7B Qwen-Omni-7B (Thinker) LLaVA-Video-7B LLaVA-OV-7B Qwen2-VL-7B-LiveCCInstruct LiveCC-7B-Instruct LiveCC-7B-Base ✗  ✗  ✗  ✗  ✗  ✗  ✓  ✓  ✓  ❀                                                                                  .
Win rate on the LiveSports-3K-CC track and QA accuracy on the LiveSports-3K-QA track.
GPT-4o-08-06 is used as the ❀ Baseline for the commentary win rate comparison due to its strong performance.
For a fair comparison, all Qwen models
[6, 80, 87] and our models are evaluated on a maximum of 480 frames.
The Qwen models did not perform as expected, as they tend to simply caption the video rather than follow the preceding ASR context to continue the video commentary.
and maintaining general video QA performance.
Pre-training Scalability.
c presents the results of scaling up the pre-training data.
We observe that com- mentary performance consistently improves with larger data size.
However, QA performance begins to decline be- yond the 5M scale, likely due to the use of single-source (streaming commentary) data during pre-training.
Since our primary goal is to demonstrate the effectiveness of the streaming-based pre-training, we defer the use of multi- source data to the SFT stage. .
Overall Results In and , we compare the performance of various models on general QA, streaming QA and 8 derstanding in state-of-the-art performance simultaneously.
In future work, we seek methods to train multimodal omni models in streaming.