Dynamic Camera Poses and Where to Find Them Chris Rockwell1,2 Joseph Tung3 Ming-Yu Liu1 David F. Fouhey3 University of Michigan2 NVIDIA1 Tsung-Yi Lin1 Chen-Hsuan Lin1 New York University3 5 2 0 2 r p A 4 2 ] V C . s c [ 1 v 8 8 7 7 1 . 4 0 5 2 : v i X r a https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/dynpose-100k . We introduce DynPose-100K, a large-scale video dataset of dynamic content with camera annotations. DynPose-100K consists of 100,131 Internet videos that span diverse settings. We curate DynPose-100K such that videos contain dynamic content while ensuring the cameras are able to be estimated (including intrinsics and poses). Towards this end, we address two challenging problems: (a) identifying the videos suitable for camera estimation, and (b) improving the camera estimation algorithm for dynamic videos. Abstract Annotating camera poses on dynamic Internet videos at scale is critical for advancing fields like realistic video generation and simulation. However, collecting such a dataset is difficult, as most Internet videos are unsuitable for pose estimation. Furthermore, annotating dynamic Internet videos present significant challenges even for state-of-the- art methods. In this paper, we introduce DynPose-100K, a large-scale dataset of dynamic Internet videos annotated with camera poses. Our collection pipeline addresses fil- tering using a carefully combined set of task-specific and generalist models. For pose estimation, we combine the latest techniques of point tracking, dynamic masking, and structure-from-motion to achieve improvements over the state-of-the-art approaches. Our analysis and experiments demonstrate that DynPose-100K is both large-scale and di- verse across several key attributes, opening up avenues for advancements in various downstream applications. 1 1. Introduction Our contributions are summarized as: Annotating large-scale dynamic Internet video with cam- era information has the potential to advance many prob- lems in computer vision and robotics. Such a dataset could power generative models [5, 8, 25, 34, 55, 55, 70, 95] to create camera-controlled dynamic videos [14, 32, 42, 56, 65, 90, 93, 102] and 4D scenes [2, 71, 104]. It could also enable large-scale training of view synthesis mod- els [10, 17, 24, 49, 83, 91, 99] for extended reality appli- cations. Additionally, this data could be transformational in robotics for tasks like imitation learning [1, 23, 58] or training in realistic simulation environments [6, 35, 89]. However, constructing a dataset of dynamic videos with camera annotations is challenging. First, most Internet videos are not suitable for camera pose estimation. They may be cartoons, contain substantial post-processing, or lack a clear frame of reference. Next, estimable videos are often low quality or do not contain scene dynamics. Fur- thermore, even if suitable target videos can be identified, the process of estimating dynamic camera poses remains challenging. Techniques that work well in static settings, such as structure-from-motion, struggle with moving ob- jects, varying appearances, and other complex dynamics common in Internet videos. Given the challenges, most existing datasets take a dif- ferent approach. One line of work uses synthetic data [9, 28, 51, 52, 62, 105] where ground-truth camera data can be ob- tained. However, this often results in smaller-scale datasets (typically <500 videos) due to the high cost of 3D assets, and methods face a sim2real gap. Recent work finds cam- era data from real videos in restricted domains, such as ego- centric videos , self-driving videos , hand-collected videos of pets or specific actions . These setups make SfM easier via dense viewpoints , LiDAR sen- sory data , multiple cameras [27, 37] and turntable-style videos . However, such setups also impose significant constraints on the collected data. We introduce DynPose-100K, a large collection of dy- namic Internet videos with camera annotations. Sample videos and annotations appear in . The dataset contains diverse content, a variety of dynamic object ap- parent sizes and targeted video length; and is analyzed in § 4. We address the central challenges of filtering for suit- able dynamic video and annotating the corresponding cam- era poses with a carefully designed pipeline (§ 3). Our fil- tering pipeline combines a mix of specialized experts that handle common reasons videos are unsuitable, as well as a generalist VLM that can detect and remove a variety of is- sues. We produce accurate poses using a new method that merges the state-of-the-art in motion masking, correspon- dence tracking, and SfM. We apply this approach to Panda- 70M [12, 94], filtering M videos to produce 100K with high-quality camera information. 1. We introduce DynPose-100K, a large-scale dynamic In- ternet video dataset annotated with camera information. Analysis shows the dataset is diverse in content and dy- namics, and has targeted video length. 2. We propose a filtering pipeline using specialist models and a VLM, motivated by Internet video analysis. 3. We propose a dynamic pose estimation pipeline integrat- ing state-of-the-art components in tracking and masking. 4. Experiments show filtering selects videos with far higher precision than alternatives and pose estimation reduces error across metrics and settings by as much as 90%. 2. Related Work This work aims to collect and annotate dynamic Internet video with camera pose. To do so, we face challenges in data curation and pose estimation. Dynamic camera pose datasets. Due to challenges in predicting dynamic camera pose, datasets typically adopt strategies to replace or aid standard SfM. Synthetic datasets are appealing as ground truth pose can be obtained [9, 28, 51, 52, 62, 105, 105]. However, the requirement for en- gineered dynamic assets means the datasets are of small size and often contain limited dynamics e.g. objects fly- ing or falling . In real-world video, SfM is made easier with e.g. turntable-style captures , dense view- points , multiple cameras , fisheye captures , and LiDAR . We leverage the diverse Internet video dataset from Panda-70M and show our method can annotate high quality poses without relying on the con- straints of prior work. Concurrent works CamCo and B-Timer collect 12K and 40K diverse videos , re- spectively; we collect 100K and publicly release data. Camera pose estimation. Given many overlapping views of a static scene [4, 11, 40, 48, 67, 106], classical SfM [66, 74, 76] and SLAM are gold standards for preci- sion, while learned methods recently are becoming com- petitive [21, 41, 73, 77, 80, 82, 85, 88, 98, 101] given large datasets [64, 87, 97, 106]. Dynamic Internet video is more challenging as dynamic correspondences cannot be used for bundle adjustment and also limit static correspon- dence. Recent works [26, 43, 50, 103] mask dynamics us- ing learned prediction [13, 69, 103] or motion and seman- tic cues [31, 33, 78]. We upgrade masking using state-of- the-art methods in semantics, interaction, motion and track- ing [15, 31, 36, 63, 78]. Correspondence estimation in Internet video is also chal- lenging due to varying lighting and appearance . As a result, we show masking+classical SfM fails on di- verse Internet video. ParticleSfM improves by induc- ing dense correspondences via propagated optical flow 2 . Panda-Test dataset statistics. Statistics reflect human labels on held-out 1K video Panda-Test set, detailed in § . Only 9% are target dynamic camera pose estimation videos due to various issues, e.g. static scene, low-quality or non-real content, and ambiguous or blurry frame of reference. We focus on moving cameras to facilitate downstream tasks e.g. camera-controlled video generation and learned pose estimation. We remove unsuitable videos using a combination of specialist models and a generalist VLM. and uses more robust Global Bundle Adjustment, Theia- SfM . We adopt Theia-SfM and upgrade correspon- dence estimation by utilizing advances in long-term track- ing [19, 30, 68, 84] via BootsTAP . Concurrent work TracksTo4D predicts pose and dynamic masks given 2D tracks but focuses on small dynamics and circu- lar camera motion ; we build off stronger 2D tracking BootsTAP and tackle diverse Internet video. Concurrent work DATAP-SfM trains joint tracking and motion pre- diction on synthetic FlyingThings3D , we instead lever- age tracking and masking methods trained on large amounts of real data [16, 20, 46, 63] and collect a large-scale dataset. Concurrent works MonST3R and MegaSaM gen- eralize learned DUSt3R and DROID-SLAM , re- spectively, to dynamic scenes; we build around classical SfM for pose annotation given its precision in longer video. 3. DynPose-100K: Dataset Curation DynPose-100K is a large-scale video dataset comprising di- verse dynamic Internet content with camera annotations. Assembling such a dataset is challenging due to two pri- mary issues related to camera pose estimation: (a) the vast majority of Internet videos are unsuitable for successful camera pose estimation, and (b) camera pose estimation on dynamic videos is inherently a challenging problem. We address these challenges in this section. . Candidate Selection Criteria Most videos in representative Internet video datasets such as Panda-70M are unsuitable for estimating camera pose: shows only 9% of videos from a randomly selected test set of 1,000 videos from Panda-70M dataset satisfy the criteria for camera pose estimation in dynamic settings. We start by defining specific criteria to identify videos suitable for camera pose estimation, which we detect via subsequently defined data filtering steps. We argue that videos should satisfy three criteria: C1. Real-world and quality video. Videos must be from the real world i.e. not cartoons, computer screen recordings, side-by-side/composited videos, and heav- ily edited processed content. The videos should also be of sufficient quality, resolution, frame rate and should not have non-perspective distortion. C2. Feasibility for pose prediction. Videos should not contain severe zoom-in or zoom-out effects, abrupt shot changes, or ambiguous reference frames (e.g. scenes filmed inside a moving car). Videos without static corre- spondences, e.g., when the background is fully blurred or occluded should be excluded. C3. Dynamic camera and scene. Non-static camera al- lows non-trivial pose for e.g. training pose estimation or camera-controlled video generation methods. Videos with moving cameras and dynamic scenes typically also provide richer data, e.g., interactions involving people, supporting a wider range of downstream applications. . Candidate Video Selection The filtering process aims to automatically select videos matching these three criteria. Our filtering pipeline iden- tifies common reasons for unsuitability using specialized models (e.g. trained to detect distortion or estimate the cam- era focal length). On the other hand, a variety of other problems, e.g., post-edited text are not effectively handled by these specialized models. To this end, we use the re- cent vision-language models (VLM) and prompt them to detect a variety of issues. As will be shown in § , while individual filters (including the VLM) are insufficient on their own, their combined use is effective. Filtering using task-specific models. Specialized models are designed to address specific, frequently occurring rea- sons for video rejection. These models are operated on tem- porally subsampled frames to enable efficient processing. 1. Cartoons and presenting. This uses a classifier to remove criteria in (C1) e.g. cartoon or screen recording; and (C3) e.g. static scenes of person sitting in front of camera or unlikely to interact. 3 Not realQuality/ethicalNot estimableStatic cameraStatic sceneTarget videos%%%27%%9% 2. Non-perspective distortion. Videos with high predicted distortion are removed. Distortion complicates applica- tions that require reliable correspondences, so we con- sider them low quality (C1). 3. Focal length. Videos with high predicted focal length variance are removed, as they often contain zoom effects or shot changes (C2). We also exclude videos with long focal lengths, which typically include backgrounds that are too blurred for reliable pose estimation (C2) or are sporting shots with static cameras (C3). 4. Dynamic object masking. Videos with excessively large predicted mask sizes are considered unsuitable for pose estimation (C2) and are removed, as reliable pose esti- mation requires sufficient static correspondences. 5. Optical flow. High peak sequential optical flow is typi- cally due to shot change (C2); such videos are removed using predicted flow. Low mean sequential flow typi- cally indicates static videos (C3); these are also removed. 6. Point tracking. Abrupt disappearance of predicted point tracks can indicate shot change, blurred background, or severe zoom-in/zoom-out, making the video unsuitable for pose estimation (C2). Conversely, extremely sta- ble tracks suggest neither the camera nor the scene has moved significantly (C3). Both cases are removed. Filtering using general VLM. The generalist VLM ad- dresses a variety of possibilities for video rejection. We prompt GPT-4o mini [59, 60] a series of eight questions ad- dressing all three classes of criteria. They cover: if the video is taken from an ambiguous reference, if the background is too blurry to match correspondence, if frames are distorted or have very long focal length, if the scene is static, if the video is a cartoon, has been post-processed, and if children are present. We find having overlap with specialist filters, e.g. identifying long focal length, is helpful, since the VLM can be prompted to consider diverse cues for removal. Collection details. Beginning from M Panda-70M videos, we apply filtering (§ ) leaving 137K dynamic videos. We estimate pose on 107K and drop trajecto- ries with less than 80% of frames registered, leaving 100k videos. We apply filters sequentially for efficiency. First are lightweight Hands23, optical flow and focal length filters on the full set. We remove low scoring videos, leaving M videos. We next run the distort filter and remove low scores, leaving M; then tracking, leaving 679K; then masking, leaving 462K; and finally the VLM, after which we apply a strict final filter to get 137K for pose estimation. . Dynamic Camera Pose Estimation . Pose estimation approach. We apply the state-of-the- art point tracking method at a sliding window to produce dense, long-term correspondences. Complementary dynamic masks are used to remove non-static tracks. The remaining static tracks are provided as input to global bundle adjustment. occlude the underlying static scene, the static scene can change appearance making correspondence estimation dif- ficult. Our approach addresses both challenges (). For masking, we use state-of-the-art methods in semantics, interaction, motion, and tracking, with each component im- proving overall performance. For correspondences, we use the latest point tracking method applied within a slid- ing window on the video. Finally, we apply global bundle adjustment , which has shown to be effective in han- dling the challenges posed by Internet videos . Dynamic masking. We first aim to segment dynamic re- gions in an input video. Our approach uses advances in several communities to produce accurate masks. 1. Semantic segmentation. We segment common dynamic classes (e.g. humans, vehicles, animals, and sports equipment) using OneFormer . 2. Object interaction segmentation. This masks held ob- jects which may dynamic yet outside semantic classes e.g. silverware. We use the Hands23 hand-object interaction segmentation model. 3. Motion segmentation. This handles dynamic objects that are not common classes or involve human manipulation, e.g. rustling leaves or flowing water. We use motion masking of RoDynRF , which removes regions with high Sampson error based on optical flow . Having collected suitable videos, our objective is to obtain high-quality camera poses. Pose estimation on dynamic In- ternet video is challenging: not only do dynamic objects 4. Mask propagation. Propagation provides smooth masks across frames and precise object boundaries. We use SAM2 to propagate masks. 4 Input video…Point trackingDynamic maskingGlobal bundle adjustmentOutput camera poses Point tracking. We estimate correspondences using point tracking, which uses temporal information in videos to improve estimation. Unlike pairwise estimation, tracking takes advantage of the fact that points generally move only small amounts between sequential frames. Additionally, tracking the same point over multiple frames yields rapidly increasing paired correspondences across each frame com- bination. For this purpose, we use BootsTAP to track a grid of points forward several frames, move forward, and repeat in sliding window fashion. Grid-based point track- ing facilitates denser correspondences, while the extended tracking duration supports long-term correspondences, re- ducing drift and aiding in loop closure. Sliding window tracking of point grids ensures that each frame maintains a sufficient number of correspondences in the case previous windows have become occluded or faced drift. Global bundle adjustment. We use global bundle adjust- ment method Theia-SfM , using correspondences from tracklets as input. From a single tracklet, we extract corre- spondences for all pairs, excluding pairs containing a frame in which the tracklet is contained within a dynamic mask. 4. DynPose-100K: Dataset Analysis In this work, we focus on dynamic Internet videos due to their large scale and diversity. We evaluate the effectiveness of our filtering pipeline in identifying videos suitable for pose estimation (§ ) and provide a statistical analysis of the resulting dataset (§ ). . Filtering Evaluation on Panda-Test Our goal for filtering is to identify suitable videos for pose estimation given diverse Internet video. Dataset. We evaluate filtering performance on 1,000 ran- domly selected held-out videos from Panda-70M, which we refer to as Panda-Test. Each video is manually classified as suitable or unsuitable for pose estimation, yielding 90 (9%) suitable videos. These 90 videos exhibit similar diversity to DynPose-100K, e.g. content, lengths, and dynamic sizes. Metrics. Our primary evaluation metrics are precision and recall. We prioritize precision, aiming to minimize the num- ber of inaccurate videos included in DynPose-100K. How- ever, recall is also important, as a low recall would mean a larger number of necessary videos to process to achieve a dataset of the same size. Baselines and ablations. We compare our method with existing and alternative filtering methods. We filter using Our SfM reconstructed points (CamCo ) and reprojec- tion error (inspired by B-Timer ), along with video suit- ability and interaction classifier Hands23 . In addition, we prompt GPT-4o mini in a manner similar to our fil- tering pipeline (§ ). We implement two versions of this . Dynamic video filtering on Panda-Test. We show PR curves for baselines and ablations. Our filtering surpasses all base- lines and ablations by a considerable margin. The represents DynPose-100K’s operating thresholds. For baselines, we show: ■ Reconstructed points (CamCo ), ■ Reprojection error, (solid ■) GPT-4o mini : binary, (dashed ■) GPT-4o mini : score, ■ Hands23 , and ■ Ours. For ablations, we begin from ■ Hands23 and add components until we recover ■ Ours. Specifi- cally, we depict: ■ Hands23, ■ +Flow, ■ +Tracking, ■ +Mask- ing, ■ +Focal, ■ +Distort, ■ +VLM (Ours). comparison: one producing binary outputs and another as- signing scores to each example. Finally, we conduct abla- tion studies on each step of our filtering method from § . Results. shows our filtering selects videos with high precision and recall, outperforming baseline methods. In fact, filtering has test precision of  at the threshold used for collecting DynPose-100K, a level that no baseline achieves at any recall, except for reprojection error at  recall. Each component in our method improves perfor- mance, with the VLM providing a large boost, even though it is relatively weak as a standalone approach. . Dataset statistics Having collected a substantial number of target videos, we assess the characteristics of the resulting dataset. In addition to evaluating the dataset size, we examine whether resulting videos exhibit desirable attributes, e.g. diverse content, ap- propriate video length and diverse dynamic object size. Dataset size. shows that DynPose-100K con- tains many more videos than existing diverse datasets. The largest alternatives are typically limited to specific set- tings, such as kitchens, driving, walking, or pet turntable videos [27, 37, 72, 75, 81]. Concurrent works CamCo and B-Timer also feature diverse content but have fewer videos and are private. Video content. shows frequent nouns and verbs that appear in Panda-70M’s captions associated with DynPose-100K videos. Common nouns cover a wide range of subjects, objects and settings; while verbs reflect a va- riety of actions. This linguistic variety provides evidence DynPose-100K contains videos with diverse content. 5 .Recall.PrecisionPR Curves: Baselines.Recall.PR Curves: Ablations Dataset Real/Syn. Num. vids. Num. frames Domain Access T.Air Shibuya MPI Sintel PointOdyssey FlyingThings3D Kubric Movi-E EpicFields Waymo CoP3D Ego-Exo4D Stereo4D CamCo B-Timer DynPose-100K Syn. Syn. Syn. Syn. Syn. Real Real Real Real Real Real Real Real 7 14 131 220 400 671 1,150 4,200 5,035 110,000 12,000 40,000 100,131 K K 200K 2K 10K 19,000K 200K 600K 23,000K 10,000K 385K 19,000K 6,806K Street Scripted Walking Objects Objects Kitchens Driving Pets Set tasks S. fisheye Diverse Diverse Diverse Public Public Public Public Public Public Public Public Public Public Private Private Public . Dynamic camera pose datasets. DynPose-100K has the most videos of diverse Internet video datasets. Datasets with more frames are private or more uniform; e.g. stereo fisheye is typically outdoor PoV walking. We use short videos, yielding fewer frames but high dynamics (). . Diverse content. Frequent nouns cover var- ied subjects: person, hand, car; objects: shirt, table, food; and settings: room, kitchen, street. Verbs span diverse actions: using, working, playing. use a photorealistic synthetic rendering dataset, Lightspeed, which provides ground truth poses for direct comparison; we evaluate directly on Internet videos by annotating 10K precise correspondences on Panda-Test, enabling pose evaluation using Sampson error . Baselines and ablations. Our primary point of comparison throughout is ParticleSfM , which shares our general pipeline involving static tracking, dynamic masking, and global SfM. We also compare against standard SfM method COLMAP , both in its original form and with corre- spondences filtered using dynamic masking. Finally, we evaluate our method against state-of-the-art learning-based static methods DROID-SLAM and DUSt3R , and dynamic methods LEAP-VO and MonST3R . . Pose Evaluation on Lightspeed We introduce Lightspeed, a challenging, photorealistic benchmark for dynamic pose estimation containing ground truth camera pose. This dataset is a good benchmark for pose estimation because it is shares several important char- acteristics of DynPose-100K: diverse environments, large dynamic objects and varied clip lengths of several seconds. Dataset. We use NVIDIA Racer RTX , shown in , which follows several RC cars moving quickly through challenging indoor and outdoor scenes, featuring day and night lighting and first and third person views. We split the video into clips, removing ones with non- perspective distortion, blurry background, static scenes, or cameras with static or have trivial linear trajectory (follow- ing ), resulting in 36 sequences. We extract ground truth camera pose from corresponding 3D Assets. Metrics. We follow prior work [50, 69, 103] in reporting Average Trajectory Error (ATE) as well as Relative Pose Error (RPE) for rotation and translation. For full details . Left: Targeted video length. DynPose-100K videos are primarily 4-10s, ideal for dynamic pose: shorter videos contain lit- tle ego-motion, longer videos have less dense dynamics and ego- motion. Right: Diverse dynamic apparent size. Mean size in % across video. Large dynamic objects occlude static correspon- dences, making pose estimation challenging. Videos may average small size in the case of only a few dynamic frames. Video length. , left shows the distribution of video lengths in DynPose-100K. The majority of videos span 4 to 10 seconds. These short clips are typically rich in dynamics, while being long enough for substantial camera motion. Dynamic object size. , right shows the distribution of apparent dynamic object sizes in DynPose-100K, rang- ing from small to large. Large dynamic objects occlude static correspondences, making pose estimation challeng- ing. Smaller apparent dynamic objects typically correspond to objects further away, which can move quickly, making precise masking challenging. Videos where dynamic ob- jects occupy nearly the entire frame are filtered out as they make pose estimation infeasible. 5. Evaluation on Camera Pose Estimation We proceed to evaluate the pose estimation efficacy of the curated dataset DynPose-100K through controlled exper- iments. Direct evaluation on dynamic Internet videos is challenging due to the lack of ground truth camera pose data. Our evaluation approach is therefore two-fold: we 6 Frequency: Common NounsmanpersonwomanfrontcamerapeopleroomshirttablegroupfoodhandkitchencarstreetFrequency: Verbsstandingholdingtalkingwalkingwearingsittinglookingpointingusingworkingplayingsmilingparkedtakingcooking46810Length (seconds)DensityVideo length020406080Size (% of frame)Dynamic apparent size Method % Vids. reg.↑ ATE (m)↓ RPE Tr. (m)↓ RPE Rot. (◦)↓ ATE (m)↓ RPE Tr. (m)↓ RPE Rot. (◦)↓ All 36 videos (Iden. Rot. + Rand. Tr. if fail) 8 videos: all succeed only Iden. Rot. + Rand. Tr. DROID-SLAM DUSt3R MonST3R LEAP-VO COLMAP COLMAP+Mask ParticleSfM Ours 100. 100.  100. 100.    100.                                                       . Camera pose estimation on Lightspeed. Our pose estimation algorithm registers all sequences and cuts trajectory error by 50% across all sequences (left) and 90% on easy sequences (right) vs. all other methods. . Predicted trajectories on Lightspeed. Pose sequence over time: ROYGBV. We visualize photorealistic renderings of Light- speed left. Static methods DROID-SLAM, COLMAP and DUSt3R struggle in this dynamic setting, failing to register a consistent se- quence or putting too much or too little curvature. Top: dynamic methods MonST3R, LEAP-VO and ParticleSfM do not produce smooth sequences. Bottom: MonST3R, LEAP-VO and COLMAP+Mask add curvature. Ours produces smooth and accurate trajectories. see prior work. To summarize, metrics are computed after trajectory alignment and scaling, and relative error is com- puted on sequential frames. To compute scores across all videos, we replace predicted trajectories that do not con- verge with random uniform translations and identity rota- tions. We also separately report scores on the subset of videos upon which all methods converge. Results. shows COLMAP and COLMAP+Mask struggle to register many challenging sequences in Light- speed. DROID-SLAM, DUSt3R, LEAP-VO and Parti- cleSfM provide registration, but are inaccurate. MonST3R offers better trajectory error, though Ours is clearly supe- rior, cutting trajectory error by 50% (all videos) and 90% (succeed only). All alternatives struggle in at least one se- quence in , while Ours handles both. . Pose Evaluation on Panda-Test Next, we evaluate on dynamic Internet videos. We use the 90-video subset from Panda-Test (§ ), featuring various challenging objects with estimable camera poses. Metrics. Ground truth camera poses are unavailable in unlabeled dynamic Internet videos, so we opt to anno- tate correspondences and compute Sampson error from the predicted poses. We curate 10K correspondences across unique image pairs spanning the 90 videos to use for evalu- ation. Pairs are manually annotated by expert annotators to achieve coarse accuracy. These matches are refined using SuperPoint and LightGlue by selecting the Light- Glue match found within 10 pixels of the human-labeled points on 720p images. If no such match is found, the corre- spondence is discarded. Frame pairs are selected randomly from within  seconds of each other. Reprojection error for each pair is the square root of Sampson error. Sampson error computes the squared dis- tance from an annotated correspondence to the epipolar line computed using the fundamental matrix based on predicted relative camera pose and intrinsics. Metrics are averaged for all pairs in each video, enabling per-video analysis. Our main metrics are mean error across videos, and percent of videos with mean reprojection error within a threshold; we use 5, 10 and 30 pixels at normalized 720p resolution. Non- registered frames are filled with nearest neighbor poses. If an entire sequence is not registered, the identity is used. Results. shows similar trends to Lightspeed: static methods DROID-SLAM and DUSt3R are inaccurate while COLMAP, even with dynamic masking, struggles to reg- ister many videos. ParticleSfM improves, but contains high mean error. MonST3R and LEAP-VO register all frames, but Ours reduces error across metrics. This in- 7 OursParticleSfMCM + MaskDUSt3RDROID-SLAMMonST3RGround TruthCOLMAPLEAP-VO All 90 estimable videos (Identity if fail) % Vids. Mean per-video reprojection error, 720p 52 videos: all succeed only Mean per-video reprojection error, 720p Baselines registered↑ % < 5Pix↑ % < 10 Pix↑ % < 30 Pix↑ Mean↓ % < 5 Pix↑ % < 10 Pix↑ % < 30 Pix↑ Mean↓ Identity DROID-SLAM DUSt3R MonST3R LEAP-VO COLMAP COLMAP+Mask ParticleSfM Ours 100. 100.  100. 100.                                151                                   100. 133         . Camera pose estimation on Panda-Test. Reprojection error on 10K image pairs, by video, normalized to 720p. Static methods DUSt3R and COLMAP struggle faced with dynamics while DROID-SLAM lacks precision. ParticleSfM registers more videos than COLMAP+Mask but both fall short of Ours in registration and accuracy. MonST3R and LEAP-VO register all frames leading to moderate errors, but Ours outperforms across metrics. . Predicted trajectories on Panda-Test. Pose sequence over time: ROYGBV. Static methods like DROID-SLAM, DUSt3R and COLMAP struggle faced with dynamics. MonST3R, LEAP-VO, COLMAP+Mask and ParticleSfM can struggle with large dynamic regions (top) and tracking across varied appearance and lighting (bottom); while Ours handles these cases. Method All 90 estimable videos (Identity if fail) % Vids. reg.↑ Mean per-video reprojection error, 720p % < 5Px↑ % < 10 Px↑ % < 30 Px↑ Mean↓ DUSt3R + Synthetic (MonST3R ) + DynPose-100K (Ours)  100. 100.             varied appearance. Evidently, the combined state-of-the-art components used for masking and tracking (§ ) yield a pipeline effective at each corresponding task. 6. Conclusion In this paper, we introduce DynPose-100K, a large-scale dataset of dynamic Internet video annotated with camera poses. It is curated using carefully designed video filter- ing and camera pose estimation pipelines, validated through experiments. We hope DynPose-100K will enable exciting new possibilities. For instance, shows the dataset can fine-tune DUSt3R to produce lower mean error than the synthetic data of MonST3R . To supplement DynPose-100K, we collect high-quality synthetic dataset Lightspeed, enabling ground truth pose benchmarking.