PointLoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation with Token Selection for Point Cloud Learning Song Wang1,2, Xiaolu Liu1, Lingdong Kong2, Gongfan Fang2, Wentong Li4, Jianyun Xu3*, Chunyong Hu3, Jianke Zhu1†, Xinchao Wang2† 5 2 0 2 r p A 2 2 ] V C . s
c [ 1 v 3 2 0 6 1 . 4 0 5 2 : v i X r a 1ZJU 2NUS 3AD Lab, CaiNiao, Alibaba 4NUAA {songw, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, xinchao@nus.edu.sg
Abstract Self-supervised representation learning for point cloud has demonstrated effectiveness in improving pre-trained model performance across diverse tasks.
However, as pre- trained models grow in complexity, fully fine-tuning them for downstream applications demands substantial compu- tational and storage resources.
Parameter-efficient fine- tuning (PEFT) methods offer a promising solution to mit-
igate these resource requirements, yet most current ap- proaches rely on complex adapter and prompt mecha- increase tunable parameters.
In this paper, nisms that we propose PointLoRA, a simple yet effective method that combines low-rank adaptation (LoRA) with multi-scale token selection to efficiently fine-tune point cloud mod- els.
Our approach embeds LoRA layers within the most parameter-intensive components of point cloud transform- ers, reducing the need for tunable parameters while en- hancing global feature capture.
Additionally, multi-scale token selection extracts critical local information to serve as prompts for downstream fine-tuning, effectively com-
plementing the global context captured by LoRA.
The ex- perimental results across various pre-trained models and three challenging public datasets demonstrate that our ap- proach achieves competitive performance with only % of the trainable parameters, making it highly effective for resource-constrained applications.
Source code is available at: https://github.com/songw-zju/PointLoRA.
1. Introduction 3D point cloud learning plays a vital role in computer vi- sion, advancing the understanding and reconstruction of complex 3D scenes [4, 12, 22, 30, 62].
Training deep neural networks on point clouds presents unique challenges due to their unordered structure, sparsity, and irregularity.
In recent *Project leader.
†Corresponding authors.
years, point-based methods [29, 33, 41, 42, 45, 64] have made significant progress in addressing these challenges.
As the volume of available point cloud data grows, there has been a surge in interest toward pre-training on unlabeled point clouds to learn generalizable representa- tions
[36, 43, 47, 64, 69, 76].
Robust pre-trained mod- els enable efficient fine-tuning for downstream tasks, re- ducing dependency on labeled data, accelerating conver- gence, and improving accuracy
[23, 66].
However, conven- tional full fine-tuning can disrupt pre-trained knowledge, potentially diminishing the model’s generalization capabil- ity.
Moreover, full fine-tuning requires storing multiple ver- sions of model weights, leading to substantial storage costs as datasets and tasks expand, along with increased compu- tational demands for larger pre-trained models.
Recent studies [51, 72, 75, 77] have made strides in in- troducing parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods to pre-trained point cloud models, building on approaches widely used in natural language processing (NLP) and 2D vision
[9, 65].
As an illustration, IDPT utilizes instance-aware dynamic prompt tuning to enhance model robustness in downstream transfer learning tasks.
The sub- sequent methods [51, 77] combine prompt tuning with adapter tuning, while relying on carefully crafted adapters and specialized prompt design.
PPT presents positional prompt tuning, which doubles the sequence length and sig- nificantly increases computational requirements.
To fine-tune in a more efficient manner and further re- duce the parameter count, we propose PointLoRA, which leverages low-rank adaptation (LoRA) , widely stud- ied in large language models, to enable better fine-tuning for point cloud models.
As shown in Fig. 1 (a), during LoRA fine-tuning, instead of directly updating the pre- trained weights, two auxiliary low-rank matrices, Wu and Wd, are injected to update the network with fewer tunable parameters.
From a 3D learning perspective, these matrices function as fully connected layers that effectively capture global point cloud features but lack local information ex- traction, akin to the architecture of PointNet .
1 .
Comparing our proposed PointLoRA approach against vanilla LoRA methods.
Both LoRA and our approach incorporate low-rank adaptation matrices into the pre-trained weights to extract global information from the point cloud sequence.
Furthermore, our approach integrates tokens selected at various scales to capture local information, which is refined using a shared Prompt MLP and then output alongside the results derived from the original low-rank matrices.
Unlike 2D visual or language data, 3D point clouds con- tain distinctive local geometric features critical for down- stream tasks.
Additionally, not all local positions contribute equally to the model, as their relevance varies depending on the specific task and data characteristics.
To address this, we further design a Multi-Scale Token Selection module, providing local prior information as a prompt to comple- ment LoRA’s global feature aggregation capabilities.
Us- ing multi-scale sampling and k-nearest neighbor aggrega- tion, we derive tokens that represent features across differ- ent scales.
A shared Mask Predictor then selects a subset of these tokens to act as prompts.
During fine-tuning, tokens from various positions are dynamically selected, processed through a Prompt MLP, and incorporated into the LoRA layer, as illustrated in Fig.
1 (b).
This design enables the in- tegration of essential local geometric features with global context, allowing the pre-trained model to adapt effectively to diverse downstream tasks.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
•
We propose PointLoRA, a simple yet effective scheme for parameter-efficient fine-tuning in point cloud learning.
• Low-rank adaptation is injected into the most parameter- intensive components of the point cloud transformer to capture global information, with a corresponding analysis in the context of PointNet provided.
•
We further design a multi-scale token selection module that dynamically incorporates local geometric informa- tion as prompt, enriching global low-rank adaptation with the crucial local context.
• Extensive experiments across three challenging datasets and two widely used pre-trained models validate the ef- fectiveness of our method, achieving state-of-the-art per- formance with only % of the trainable parameters.
2. Related Work Model Pre-Training on Point Clouds.
Self-supervised pre-training for 3D point clouds has been widely explored [36, 43, 47, 55, 56, 64, 69, 76], generally categorized into contrastive-based approaches
[1, 7, 39, 64, 66] and masked signal reconstruction methods [5, 6, 40, 69, 74].
In con- trastive learning, PointContrast and CrossPoint leverage different views or instances to extract latent fea- tures through contrasting representations.
SegContrast extends this approach to outdoor LiDAR data, extract- ing class-agnostic segments from augmented views .
Reconstruction-based methods, such as Point-BERT and Point-MAE , employ masked point cloud recon- struction for pre-training.
In ACT , a pre-trained autoen- coder serves as a cross-modality teacher, guiding 3D point cloud learning through knowledge distillation
[17, 57, 58].
PointGPT adapts the GPT framework for auto- regressive generation on point clouds.
Additionally, Qi et al.
[43, 44] propose a combination of reconstruction and cross-modal contrastive learning within generative models.
While full fine-tuning is commonly applied to these pre- trained models for downstream tasks, the high computa- tional costs and potential dilution of pre-trained knowledge motivate our exploration of efficient fine-tuning strategies.
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT).
PEFT methods have gained traction in NLP and 2D vision tasks [8, 9, 19, 21, 28, 48, 63, 73] to enhance downstream performance with minimal tunable parameters.
Mainstream PEFT ap- proaches include prompt and prefix tuning, adapter-based methods, and low-rank adaptation.
Prompt and prefix tun- ing
[21, 25, 28, 48] introduce additional tokens as tunable components, with VPT pioneering the use of prompt tokens for pre-trained vision transformers (ViTs)
[11, 26, 49, 67].
Adapter-based tuning inserts trainable modules be- tween frozen layers
[8, 19, 27, 50], while LoRA applies a low-rank approximation to update linear layers within 2 Pretrained WeightsWuWd(a) LoRAPretrained WeightsWuWd(b) PointLoRA⊕⊕udWWW∆=⋅WpWpPrompt MLP(Shared)FrozenTrainable…Original Tokens:inputclsConcat(,)pTTT=…Original Tokens with Selected Tokens:input(,)pTS…………Mainly global informationEmbedded with Local PriorudWWW∆=⋅ attention blocks.
Building on these techniques, recent in- novations explore alternative adapter placements
[14, 31], tuning bias terms , and combining with Mixture-of- Experts (MoE) techniques
[35, 70].
Recent studies have also adapted PEFT to point cloud analysis [32, 51, 72, 75, 77].
IDPT extends prompt tuning to DGCNN for instance-aware prompt extraction.
Point-PEFT and DAPT combine prompt tuning with adapters to fur- ther improve fine-tuning performance, while PPT in- troduces positional prompt tuning for efficient 3D represen- tation learning.
In contrast to these approaches, our work uniquely integrates low-rank adaptation with multi-scale to- ken selection, achieving competitive performance with a significantly reduced parameter footprint.
3. Preliminary
In this section, we revisit the architecture of point cloud transformer and the corresponding fine-tuning prototypes. .
Point Cloud Transformer Point Tokenizer.
Due to the sparsity and irregularity of point clouds, it is necessary to transform them into a to- ken sequence suitable for processing by the transformer.
We follow standard settings [40, 69] by segmenting the point cloud into irregular patches using the farthest point sam- pling (FPS) and the k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) algorithm.
Formally, given the point cloud P = {p1, p2, . . .
, pN } ∈ RN ×3 with N points, the g group centers are obtained with FPS: Cg = FPS (P ) , Cg ∈ Rg×3, where Cg is the selected center points.
Then, we use k-NN to select k nearest neighbor points for each center in Cg: Np = k-NN (P, Cg) , Np ∈ Rg×k×3, where Np is the corresponding neighbor point patch.
No- tably, these local point patches are made unbiased by sub- tracting their center points, which promotes better conver- gence.
Then a mini-PointNet is utilized to embed the point patches into discrete tokens Tp: Tp = mini-PointNet (Np) , Tp ∈ Rg×d, where d is the embedding dimension.
Following the tok- enization process, the 3D point cloud is converted into a feature vector, enabling subsequent processing with Trans- former architectures similar to those used in natural lan- guage processing and 2D vision.
Transformer Block.
With a classification token Tcls and the obtained Tp, the input Tinput = Concat(Tcls, Tp) is further processed by L-layer transformer blocks.
In each block, we first project Tinput into query, key, and value spaces: Q = TinputWQ, K = TinputWK, V = TinputWV , 3 where WQ, WK, WV ∈ Rd×d are trainable matrices in qkv projection layer.
The attention layer then com- putes the self-attention with a skip connection as follows: T ′ output = Attention (Q, K, V) +
Tinput.
Then, the final output Toutput is computed as: (cid:1)(cid:1) +
T ′ Toutput = FFN (cid:0)LN (cid:0)T ′ output output, where LN is the layer norm function and FFN is the feed-forward network layer .
Through L Transformer blocks, the network extracts deep and essential features from the discrete tokens.
Notably, the qkv projection parameters within the attention layer, along with those in the FFN layer constitute a significant portion of the model’s parameters and are crucial for performance. .
Fine-Tuning Prototype Leveraging well-pretrained models, fine-tuning prototypes to adapt these models to diverse downstream tasks can be categorized as follows.
Full Fine-Tuning.
Full fine-tuning is the predominant ap-
proach in current point cloud pre-training research for downstream tasks, involving the direct loading of pre- trained model parameters and joint training of the encoder alongside the task-specific head.
Although this method of- fers a theoretically higher accuracy potential, it also entails substantial computational and storage overhead.
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning adapts pre-trained models to downstream tasks by freezing most of the model’s parameters, introducing lightweight modules, and selectively fine-tuning a small subset of parameters.
This approach provides a more practical solution, particularly as model sizes continue to increase.
Existing methods typically combine adapter tuning, which inserts bottleneck-like layers, and prompt tuning, which introduces prior knowledge, to fine-tune point cloud pre-trained models.
4. PointLoRA .
Overview
In this work, we aim to provide a simple but effective parameter-efficient fine-tuning method for point cloud pre- trained models.
The complete framework of our proposed PointLoRA, integrated into the existing point cloud trans- former, is illustrated in Fig.
2, addressing the parameter- intensive nature of the transformer-based network design.
Our approach can effectively enhance downstream task per- formance while keeping most of the pre-trained model pa- rameters frozen.
In the following section, we first outline the establish- ment of the vanilla LoRA baseline and analyze the fac- tors contributing to its effectiveness in point cloud learning. .
Overview of PointLoRA integrated into point cloud transformer pipeline.
Given an input point cloud, we first tokenize it using the original Point Tokenizer and perform token selection across multiple scales (Multi-Scale Token Selection).
The tokens from both components are then concatenated and fed into the Transformer Block.
Our approach is injected into the qkv projection and FFN layers, utilizing a shared Prompt MLP within these layers to enhance parameter efficiency.
Then we present how our method extends LoRA’s feature extraction capabilities to achieve competitive performance in 3D scenarios. .
Vanilla LoRA Baseline
As mentioned in Sec. , the qkv projection and feed-forward network (FFN) layers in point cloud trans- former significantly increase the number of parameters, lim- iting the fine-tuning efficiency and hindering deployment in resource-limited environments.
To address this issue, we incorporate Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) into these lay- ers by introducing low-rank matrices to adapt pre-trained weights, thereby reducing the number of trainable param- eters while preserving model performance.
Given a pre- trained weight matrix Wp, LoRA modifies it as follows: Wupdate = Wp + ∆W = Wp + Wu ·
Wd, where ∆W and Wupdate denotes the updated weight and new weight matrix, respectively.
Wu ∈ Rd×r and Wd ∈ Rr×d are low-rank matrices, where r ≪ d indicates the rank, con- trolling the complexity of the adaptation.
During training, only Wu and Wd are updated, while the pre-trained weight Wp remains frozen.
For inference, the adaptation ∆W can be merged with the original weights, yielding in a single consolidated weight matrix:
Winfer = Wp + ∆W .
This consolidation enables the model to re- tain the benefits of low-rank adaptation while avoiding ad- ditional computational overhead in the inference phase.
Analysis.
LoRA’s architecture is particularly well-suited for point cloud data, as it can capture the complex relationships between points essential to understanding 3D shapes and spatial arrangements.
Its MLP-like structure (i.e., two low- rank matrices) effectively learns global features while align- ing with PointNet’s principles of handling unordered point sets and extracting permutation-invariant features.
The syn- ergy between LoRA and PointNet’s feature extraction ca- pabilities establishes a robust framework for harnessing the rich information in point cloud data, enhancing both gener- alization and adaptability in complex environments. .
PointLoRA with Token Selection While global features provide a comprehensive understand- ing of the overall structure of the point cloud, local features capture intricate details vital for accurate downstream task performance.
To fully investigate LoRA’s capabilities, it is crucial to complement the extracted global features with robust local features.
The tokenization process produces a sequence of tokens that capture various aspects of the point cloud data.
However, not all tokens are valuable for downstream tasks; some may encapsulate redundant or non- informative content, offering limited contribution to over- all model performance.
This necessitates a systematic ap- proach for filtering and selecting the most informative to- kens to enhance the model’s representation of local features.
To tackle the above concerns, we introduce a Multi- Scale Token Selection module integrated with vanilla LoRA, which is presented in Fig.
3.
This module dynam- ically selects tokens from the raw point cloud at multiple scales, allowing the model to capture local features at differ- ent levels of detail.
Additionally, PointLoRA incorporates a shared Prompt MLP to further embed local information from these selected tokens, enhancing the vanilla LoRA’s performance.
Multi-Scale Token Generation.
Specifically, we apply far- thest point sampling (FPS) on the input point cloud P with varying numbers of centroids (i.e., N1, N2, ..., NM ) to gen- erate tokens at M different scales.
As described in Sec. 3, we can obtain M sets of center points, C 1 g , . . .
, CM g , g , C 2 4 Point TokenizerDownstream HeadMulti-Scale Token SelectionSelf-AttentionFeed-Forward NetworkCLayer Norm⊕⊕PointLoRATransformer Block ×L:Concatenation⊕C:Addition…………QKV ProjectionClassification Segmentationand etc. FrozenTrainableMini-PointNetPointLoRA for downstream tasks.
These tokens are then concatenated with the original inputs to form a local geometry prompt.
In each LoRA layer of the point cloud transformer block, a Prompt MLP with a GELU activation function encodes the new input features alongside the local prompt.
This pro- cess integrates the encoded features of the selected tokens with the LoRA adaptation output.
The resulting combined output can be formulated as follows: Oupdate = Prompt MLP(Tinput, Sp) + ∆W · (Tinput, Sp), where Oupdate is the updated amount of the PointLoRA layer.
Notably, to further optimize the efficiency of the pa- rameters, the Prompt MLP is configured independently for both the qkv projection and FFN layers, while being shared across all blocks.
The multi-scale token selection process improves model performance by prioritizing the most relevant local fea- tures during fine-tuning.
By incorporating this approach, our scheme effectively refines both global and local feature representations, thereby enhancing its adaptability and ac- curacy across a range of 3D tasks. .
Training & Inference Overall Loss Function.
When fine-tuning on diverse downstream tasks across various datasets, we follow the common practice of maintaining consistency between the adopted loss and the loss function of the original task.
Ad- ditionally, we introduce a regularization term to further su- pervise the Mask Predictor.
In general, the total loss func- tion Ltotal = Ltask +λ·Lmask, where Ltask is the task-specific loss for classification or segmentation.
Lmask is the regular- ization loss for mask predictor with the balanced weight λ: Lmask = − 1 Ntotal (cid:88)Ntotal i=1 (si log(si + ϵ)+ (1 − si) log(1
− si + ϵ)), where Ntotal = N1 +N2...+NM , si denotes the importance score for each token and ϵ is a small constant (e.g., 10−6) to prevent undefined values in the logarithm.
Inference.
During inference, the additional parameters in- troduced by LoRA in the transformer block are directly merged into the original pre-trained weights, with the only newly added component being a small shared MLP dedi- cated to embed the selected tokens.
5. Experiments .
Setup Datasets.
We validate the effectiveness of our approach through extensive experiments on three widely used 3D datasets: ScanObjectNN , ModelNet40 , and ShapeNetPart .
ScanObjectNN is a challenging .
Illustration of Multi-Scale Token Selection.
In a two- scale setup, we first sample different numbers of center points, then cluster around each center point and apply Mini-PointNet encoding to generate the corresponding tokens.
These tokens are also fed into a Mask Predictor to estimate importance scores, al- lowing us to select the Top-K tokens at each scale.
p , T 2 p , . . .
, T M each containing g1, g2, . . .
, gM center points.
Subsequently, k-NN is employed to retrieve the corresponding neighbor point patches, which are then embedded into discrete tokens using a shared Mini-PointNet.
Mask Predictor for Selection.
The above process yields M token sets, T 1 p , encoding local informa- tion at multiple scales.
Our goal is to select tokens from these sets that are most beneficial for fine-tuning on down- stream tasks.
Therefore, a simple but effective Mask Pre- dictor is designed to estimate the importance of each token, producing a score vector sm ∈ Rgm×1 for each token in p ∈ Rgm×d, m = 1, ..., M .
In particular, the Mask Pre- T m dictor comprises two multi-layer perceptron (MLP) layers followed by a Sigmoid activation function: sm = Sigmoid(MLP((T m p ))).
This design enables the model to assign scores between 0 and 1 to each token, indicating their relevance for downstream tasks.
We then select a predefined number N ′ M of tokens from each scale based on their im- portance scores using Top-K selection, resulting in a refined token set {Sm 1, ..., N ′ p }M m=1: p =
TopK(T m Sm p , N ′ m), m = 1, ..., M. Local Geometry Prompt.
With the selected Ns = N ′ ...+N ′ 1 + M tokens Sp, we can capture crucial local information 5
Mask PredictorFarthest Point Sampling (FPS), N1k-NNTopKSelectionLinearReLULinearSigmoidImportance Score…Mini-PointNetSelected Multi-Scale Tokensp1{}mMmS=1{}mMms=Farthest Point Sampling (FPS), N2k-NN…Mini-PointNet .
Performance comparison on three variants of the ScanObjectNN and the ModelNet40 datasets, respectively, for real- world and synthetic object classification.
Both the number of tunable parameters and overall accuracy (OA) are reported.
All methods only employ the default data argumentation without voting as the baseline.
∗ denotes results reproduced from the public source code.
Methods Publication Tunable Params.
ScanObjectNN ModelNet40 OBJ-BG OBJ-ONLY PB-T50-RS Points Num. OA (%) PointNet PointNet++ DGCNN MVTN PointNeXt PointMLP RepSurf-U ADS OcCo Point-BERT MaskPoint Point-MAE Point-M2AE ACT RECON Traditional Supervised Learning Only  M  M  M  M  M  M  M -    - - - - -    - - - - - Self-Supervised Representation Learning (Full Fine-Tuning)  M  M  M  M  M  M  M               CVPR’17
NeurIPS’17 TOG’19
ICCV’21 NeurIPS’22
ICLR’22 CVPR’22
ICCV’23 ICCV’21
CVPR’22 ECCV’22
ECCV’22 NeurIPS 22 ICLR’23 ICML’23                Self-Supervised Representation Learning (Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning) Point-MAE (Full-FT) Point-MAE + IDPT Point-MAE + DAPT Point-MAE + PPT∗ Point-MAE + PointLoRA ECCV’22
ICCV’23 CVPR’24 arXiv’24 Ours  M (100%)  M (%)
M (%)  M (%)
M (%)  (+) (+) (−) (+)  (+) (+) (+) (+)  (−) (−) (−) (+) 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k 1k                 (+) (+) (+) (+) real-world 3D object classification dataset, which contains approximately 15, 000 indoor point cloud instances across 15 categories.
The object classification task is performed on three variants of increasing complexity, OBJ-BG, OBJ- ONLY, and PB–T50–RS, each representing different lev- els of scene realism and occlusion.
ModelNet40 , a classical synthetic dataset for 3D object recognition, con- sists of 12, 311 meshed 3D CAD objects that span 40 cate- gories.
We perform synthetic object classification and few- shot learning experiments on ModelNet40 to evaluate the robustness of the model in both standard and low-resource settings.
Additionally, to evaluate performance on detailed structures and component segmentation, we provide exper- iments on ShapeNetPart , a widely used benchmark for part segmentation, comprising 16, 881 point-level synthetic objects across 16 object categories and 50 part categories.
Evaluation Metrics.
In the evaluation, overall accuracy (OA) is adopted to assess performance on the 3D object classification task, representing the ratio of correctly clas- sified instances to the total number of instances, thus pro- viding an aggregate score over all classes.
For the part seg- mentation task, we employ mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) to evaluate the overlap between prediction and ground-truth segments, averaged across all classes.
Implementation Details.
Our method can be directly in- tegrated into existing point cloud pre-trained models.
Dur- 1 = 32 and N ′ ing fine-tuning, we follow a commonly used setup, freezing most parameters of the pre-trained model, and primarily up- dating the newly inserted parameters.
The number of scales, M , is set to 2.
At these two scales, we apply farthest point sampling (FPS) and k-NN clustering with (128, 32) and (64, 64) center and neighboring points, respectively, and then select tokens with N ′ 2 = 8.
The balanced weight λ for Mask Predictor learning is set to  For real-world and synthetic object classification, we fine-tune using Point-MAE , training for 300 epochs with a learn- ing rate of 5e−4 and a weight decay of .
For few-shot learning and part segmentation, we utilize the Recon model for fine-tuning to further validate the generalizabil- ity of our approach, with a learning rate of 2e−4 for part segmentation.
All experiments are conducted on a single GPU.
More implementation details with different baselines are provided in the Supplementary Material. .
Comparative Study Real-World & Synthetic Object Classification.
We con- duct real-world and synthetic object classification on three variants of ScanObjectNN (OBJ-BG, OBJ-ONLY, PB-T50- RS) and ModelNet40 , using default data aug- mentation and without voting.
As illustrated in Tab.
1, our proposed approach demonstrates consistent performance improvements, especially on the most challenging vari- 6 .
The t-SNE visualization results on the PB-T50-RS split of the ScanObjectNN dataset with different fine-tuning schemes.
We adopt Point-MAE as the baseline model for fair comparison.
TP: Number of tunable parameters.
OA: Overall accuracy.
Symbol ∗ denotes re-produced with official implementation.
Best viewed in colors and zoomed-in for additional details. .
Performance comparison on ModelNet40 for few- shot learning.
We report the scores of the overall accuracy (%) ± the standard deviation (%) without voting.
The top two highest accuracies are highlighted in bold and underline, respectively.
Methods Publication 5-way 10-way 10-shot 20-shot 10-shot 20-shot .
Performance comparison on the ShapeNetPart for part segmentation.
Both the mIoU for all classes (Cls.) and in- stances (Inst.) are provided.
TP indicates the number of tunable parameters.
† means the resuluts reported from DAPT .
∗ de- notes the results reproduced from the official implementation.
Methods Publication TP Cls. mIoU (%) Inst.
mIoU (%) Self-Supervised Representation Learning (Full Fine-Tuning)
Traditional Supervised Learning Only OcCo Point-BERT MaskPoint Point-MAE Point-M2AE ACT ICCV’21 ± ± ± ± CVPR’22 ± ± ± ± ECCV’22 ± ± ± ± ECCV’22 ± ± ± ± NeurIPS’22 ± ± ± ± ICLR’23 ± ± ± ±
Self-Supervised Representation Learning (Efficient Fine-Tuning) RECON (Full-FT) RECON+ IDPT RECON+ DAPT RECON+ PPT RECON+ PointLoRA Ours ICML’23 ± ± ± ±
ICCV’23 ± ± ± ± CVPR’24 ± ± ± ± arXiv’24 ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ant, PB-T50-RS, where it is the only parameter-efficient fine-tuning method that surpasses the full fine-tuned Point- MAE (% vs. %) and significantly outper- forms the state-of-the-art method, DAPT .
Notably, our approach requires only M tunable parameters, the fewest among all methods.
Furthermore, the t-SNE feature visualization of existing methods and PointLoRA is presented in Fig.
4.
Our method enables the pre-trained model to fine-tune with a minimal number of parameters, producing distinctive feature representations.
Few-shot Learning.
We also perform few-shot learning ex- periments on ModelNet40 to validate the transfer learn-
ing capability of our method with limited annotations.
Fol- lowing standard protocols
[15, 43], we evaluate the fine- tuning performance with ReCon in the 5-way / 10-way and 10-shot / 20-shot settings, respectively.
As shown in Tab. 2, our method achieves the best or second-best accu- racy in all configurations, further demonstrating the gener- alizability of the proposed scheme.
Point Cloud Part Segmentation.
The part segmentation results on the ShapeNetPart dataset are provided in PointNet PointNet++ DGCNN APES CVPR’17
NeurIPS’17 TOG’19 CVPR’23 - - - -         Self-Supervised Representation Learning (Full Fine-Tuning) OcCo MaskPoint Point-BERT Point-MAE ACT - ICCV’21  M ECCV’22
CVPR’22  M ECCV’22  M ICLR’23  M           Self-Supervised Representation Learning (Efficient Fine-Tuning) RECON (Full-FT) RECON+ IDPT†
RECON+ DAPT RECON+ PPT∗
RECON+ PointLoRA ICML’23  M  M ICCV’23  M CVPR’24  M arXiv’24  M Ours           Tab.
3.
In this fine-grained scene understanding task, our approach still achieves competitive performance with a con- strained parameter budget.
Unlike prior classification mod- els, the increase in the parameter count is primarily at- tributed to the segmentation head.
Comparison with Other PEFT Methods.
We further present a comparison with existing PEFT methods designed for other tasks, including NLP and 2D vision.
We select the most challenging PB-T50-RS variant and use the pre- trained Point-MAE model as a baseline.
As shown in Tab. 4, these methods designed for other tasks provide lim- ited performance gains when fine-tuned in 3D scenes, de- spite their parameter efficiency compared to existing 3D fine-tuning approaches.
In contrast, our method not only achieves the highest accuracy, but also uses significantly fewer parameters than the three current fine-tuning tech- niques specifically developed for point clouds, underscoring the strong potential of PointLoRA.
7
Full fine-tuning Linear Probing*DAPT (CVPR’24)PPT* (arXiv’24)PointLoRA (Ours)TP: M OA:%TP:M OA:%TP: M OA:%TP: M OA:%TP: M OA:% .
Performance comparison with other parameter-efficient methods designed for NLP and 2D Vision tasks on the hardest variant of ScanObjectNN .
Methods Publication TP PB-T50-RS Point-MAE Linear probing ECCV’22 -  M  M + Adapter + Perfix tuning + BitFit + LoRA† + VPT-Deep + AdaptFormer + SSF + IDPT + DAPT + PPT∗ + PointLoRA ICML’19
ACL’21 ACL’21 ICLR’22 ECCV’22
NeurIPS’22 NeurIPS’22 ICCV’23 CVPR’24 arXiv’24
Ours  M  M  M  M  M  M  M  M  M  M  M              .
The impact of each module of our scheme.
We provide the overall accuracy (%) on the hardest variant of ScanObjectNN and corresponding tunable parameters (TP).
“MS-FPS” indicates multi-scale furthest point sampling.
LoRA Token
Selection MS-FPS TP PB-T50-RS Full Fine-Tuning Linear Probing ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔  M  M  M  M  M      .
Ablation Study
In this section, we perform exhaustive ablation experiments on the challenging PB-T50-RS variant to investigate the ra- tionale and effectiveness of the design choices of our pro- posed approach.
The pre-trained Point-MAE is adopted as a baseline for a fair comparison.
Ablation on PointLoRA Scheme.
Firstly, we provide the ablations on each module of the proposed method.
As il- lustrated in Tab. 5, directly applying low-rank adaptation (LoRA) produces a significant improvement over linear probing, demonstrating the effectiveness of incorporating global information during the fine-tuning process.
Inject-
ing selected tokens as prompts into LoRA further improves accuracy with only a marginal increase in the number of parameters.
Finally, the local information obtained from se- lected tokens across multiple scales complements the global features of LoRA, achieving the best performance.
Ablation on Low-Rank Adaptation.
Then we perform ab- lation experiments on rank (r) in our approach, as shown in Tab.
6.
Different ranks have a noticeable impact on fine- tuning performance.
Taking into account both parameter count and accuracy, we set the rank to 8 to maximize the extraction of global information for fine-tuning.
Ablation on Multi-Scale Token Selection.
Given the crit- improvement from multi-scale token selection for ical PointLoRA, we first perform ablation experiments on the number of tokens selected at the same scale.
As shown in .
Ablation study on rank (r) of the proposed method.
Rank r TP Ratio PB-T50-RS 4 8 16 32  M  M  M  M %
% %
%     .
Ablation study on scale number M and selected token number Ns in Multi-Scale Token Selection.
Scale M Token Num.
Ns PB-T50-RS 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 64 32 16 64 & 16 32 & 8 16 & 4 32 & 16 & 8        .
Ablation study on the dimension of Prompt MLP.
Dimension TP Ratio PB-T50-RS 8 16 32 64  M  M  M  M
%
% % %     the upper part of Tab. 7, selecting 16 tokens at the orig- inal scale yields the best results, demonstrating the effec- tiveness of token selection.
Furthermore, when incorporat- ing tokens from multiple scales, optimal performance is achieved by selecting 32 and 8 tokens from two different scales, as shown in the lower part of Tab.
7.
Ablation on Prompt MLP.
We provide the ablation study on the dimension of the shared Prompt MLP, as this affects the embedding of local information in our method.
As il- lustrated in Tab. 8, setting this dimension to 32 yields the best fine-tuning performance.
Additionally, adjusting the di- mension causes only minimal changes in tunable parameter counts, suggesting flexibility in selecting this hyperparame- ter for different datasets and tasks.
6. Conclusion In this paper, a simple yet effective parameter-efficient fine- tuning approach named PointLoRA, is presented with low-rank adaptation and multi-scale token selection for point cloud models.
Low-rank adaptation efficiently re-
duces the parameter-heavy components of the point cloud transformer architecture while capturing global informa- tion.
Multi-scale token selection effectively encodes essen- tial local features as prompt, further enhancing the fine- tuning process.
The integration of global and local informa- tion enables our approach to achieve state-of-the-art results on the most challenging dataset with a minimal number of tunable parameters while also delivering competitive per- formance across other datasets and models.
8