5 2 0 2 r p A 4 2 ] V C .
s
c [ 1 v 5 9 6 7 1 . 4 0 5 2 : v i X r a PICO: Reconstructing 3D People In Contact with Objects Alp´ar Cseke1,2∗‡ Shashank Tripathi1∗† Sai Kumar Dwivedi1 Arjun S. Lakshmipathy3 Agniv Chatterjee4 Michael J. Black1 Dimitrios
Tzionas5 1Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, T¨ubingen, Germany 2Meshcapade 3Carnegie Mellon University, USA 4UT Austin, USA 5University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands .
We present PICO, a novel framework for joint human-object reconstruction in 3D. PICO includes PICO-db, a unique dataset that pairs natural images with dense vertex-level 3D contact correspondences on both the human and the object.
We leverage this dataset for building PICO-fit, an optimization-based method that fits 3D body and object meshes to an image guided by rich contact constraints.
Here, we show reconstruction results of PICO-fit: 3D human pose and shape (shown with blue color), 3D object pose and shape (shown with orange color), and contact correspondences (shown with various colors in inset).
Note that PICO-fit works for in-the-wild images, as well as for many previously untackled object classes.
Abstract Recovering 3D Human-Object Interaction (HOI) from sin- gle images is challenging due to depth ambiguities, oc- clusions, and the huge variation in object shape and ap- pearance.
Thus, past work requires controlled settings such as known object shapes and contacts, and tackles only limited object classes.
Instead, we need methods that generalize to natural images and novel object classes.
We tackle this in two main ways: We collect PICO-db, images uniquely paired with a new dataset of natural dense 3D contact correspondences on both body and ob- ject meshes.
To this end, we use images from the recent DAMON dataset that are paired with annotated contacts, but only on a canonical 3D body.
In contrast, we seek con- tact labels on both the body and the object.
To infer these, given an image, we retrieve an appropriate 3D object mesh from a database by leveraging vision foundation models.
Then, we project DAMON’s body contact patches onto the object via a novel method needing only 2 clicks per patch.
*Equal contribution.
†Project lead.
‡Work done while at MPI.
This minimal human input establishes rich contact corre- spondences between bodies and objects.
We exploit our new dataset in a novel render-and-compare fitting method, called PICO-fit, to recover 3D body and object meshes in interaction.
PICO-fit infers contact for the SMPL-X body, retrieves a likely 3D object mesh and contact from PICO-db for that object, and uses the contact to iteratively fit the 3D body and object meshes to image evidence via optimization.
Uniquely, PICO-fit works well for many object classes that no existing method can tackle.
This is crucial for scaling HOI understanding in the wild.
Our data and code are available at https://pico.is.tue.mpg.de.
1.
Introduction Humans routinely interact with objects.
Thus, recovering Human-Object Interaction (HOI) in 3D from natural images is important for human-centric applications such as smart homes, mixed reality, or assistive robots.
At its core, this en- tails inferring human pose and shape, object pose and shape, and their spatial arrangement and contacts, all in 3D. 1 Despite progress, the field lies at its infancy due to strong challenges; humans and objects come in a huge variety of shapes, they mutually occlude each other, and contact is of-
ten ambiguous in 2D images.
Thus, most work focuses on controlled settings, with known object shapes or contacts.
To be practical, however, we need to infer 3D HOI from unconstrained 2D images taken in the wild.
For this task, current methods struggle for two reasons.
First, no method robustly recovers 3D object shape from single images because, unlike for human bodies, there ex- ists no single statistical model for object shape.
And while we might hope that foundation models would provide a so- lution, their 3D reasoning skills are still limited.
Second, given 3D body and object shapes in an image, no method robustly recovers their 3D pose and arrangement.
Knowing the contact between the body and the object would facili- tate pose estimation of both.
Unfortunately, current meth- ods that regress contact information from images either (i) infer contact only in 2D , (ii) infer 3D contacts only on the body ignoring objects, or (iii) train on synthetic data so they struggle generalizing to real images.
We tackle these key limitations with a novel framework called PICO (“People In Contact with Objects”) which has three key properties: It facilitates 3D HOI reasoning in natural images with widely varying viewpoints, occlusions, body poses, and objects.
It supports human interaction with arbitrary object classes, without requiring an a-priori known object type or shape.
It enables the detection of dense contacts on both the human and the object that establish rich point correspondences between them.
Specifically, our PICO approach introduces two novel- ties: PICO-db, a dataset of natural images uniquely paired with dense body-object 3D contact annotations, and PICO-fit, a novel method for reconstructing accurate 3D HOI from natural color images by exploiting rich contacts.
We collect PICO-db and develop PICO-fit as follows.
PICO-db: 3D HOI contacts.
To train models that infer 3D contacts from in-the-wild images, we need data.
The only such dataset is DAMON , which pairs images with 3D contacts on the body.
These annotations are crowd- sourced via an online tool where people “paint” on a T- posed 3D body the contact points present in an image; see Fig.
2
(dark-gray box).
However, DAMON ignores objects.
This is a key limitation.
Moreover, it is non-trivial to extend this painting tool to include annotating contact on objects.
In particular, one needs to ensure that the contacts “painted” on an object agree with those “painted” on the body.
Therefore, to build PICO-db, we repurpose DAMON’s body contacts for objects, inspired by the ContactEdit method.
To this end, we observe that body contacts form “patches” of neighboring vertices.
ContactEdit defines a finite-length “axis” per contact patch as a fine-grained con- trol for translating, rotating, and deforming it.
Crucially, .
PICO-db dataset annotations.
Left to right: Color im- age.
Contacts (shown in various colors) annotated on the body and object.
Contact annotations establish bijective body-object corre- spondences, denoted with color-coding.
it lets us transfer the patch onto another mesh by just re- drawing the axis onto the latter.
However, this is intuitive only for experts.
Instead, we need to democratize this for non-experts to collect data at scale.
To this end, we au- tomatically generate an axis per patch via PCA; the first principal component of contact point locations provides the axis direction, and along this we sample its start-/end-ing points.
Crucially, this means that projecting a contact patch onto a new mesh requires just two clicks to define the (auto- created) axis.
Since this is an easy task, we integrate it into an online tool and use AMT to crowd-source 3D object annotations for DAMON’s images and 3D body contacts.
A key problem remains, however.
This annotation pro- cess requires a 3D object mesh that is both detailed and manifold.
To automate the estimation of 3D object shape, we exploit a large-scale database (we curate Objaverse ) and the recent OpenShape foundation model.
The latter embeds both images and point clouds (or meshes by exten- sion) in a single latent space.
At test time, we embed an image in the latent space, find the nearest-neighbor latent code, and retrieve the respective mesh that likely matches the image.
This is a simple-yet-efficient, scalable solution.
Using this approach, we collect PICO-db, which con- tains natural images with 3D contact annotations for both humans and objects; see Fig.
2. Note that our contact trans- fer is almost-isometry preserving, i.e., PICO-db has bijec- tive body-object correspondences (color-coded in Fig. 2).
PICO-fit: 3D HOI from a 2D image.
We develop a new method, called PICO-fit, that takes in a natural image and recovers 3D human pose and shape, object pose and shape, 2 and their spatial arrangement.
To this end, we employ an optimization-based render-and-compare fitting method.
Specifically, we first initialize 3D body shape and pose via the OSX model.
Then, we initialize 3D object shape via OpenShape-based database retrieval (see PICO-db para- graph above), which scales to novel classes.
However, ini- tializing object pose in 3D w.r.t.
the body is challenging.
We solve for 3D object pose by exploiting PICO-db’s body- object contact point correspondences as follows.
When operating on PICO-db images we simply exploit its annotations.
But when operating on unlabeled images, there exist no contact correspondences, so past work hand- crafts these .
Instead, we automatically infer these.
To this end, given an image, we first infer 3D body contacts using DECO , and the object class using SAM .
Based on these, we then retrieve from PICO-db the nearest- neighbor body contacts, and the respective object shape, object contacts, and body-object contact correspondences.
We find this simple approach to be surprisingly effective and we demonstrate how contact correspondences aid in 3D recovery of humans interacting with objects (see Fig. 1).
Evaluation.
We extensively compare PICO-fit, both quantitatively and qualitatively, with state-of-the-art meth- ods (PHOSA , HDM , CONTHO ).
A percep- tual study shows that PICO-fit reconstructions are perceived as much more realistic.
Applying PICO-fit on unlabeled images shows that it performs well for many previously un- tackled object classes, e.g., couches, bananas, and frisbees, demonstrating its ability to scale.
In summary, we make the following main contributions: 1. We collect PICO-db, the first dataset of natural images paired with 3D contact on both humans and objects, with dense bijective contact correspondences between them.
2.
To build PICO-db we develop a new method that projects existing body contacts onto objects with minimal effort.
3. We build PICO-fit, a method that recovers 3D HOI from an image, scaling to previously untackled object classes.
Data and code are available at https://pico.is.tue.mpg.de.
2. Related Work .
3D Humans from single images Estimating 3D human pose and shape from single images has evolved from optimization- to learning-based methods.
Optimization-based methods fit a parametric model [55, 62, 90] to image cues such as keypoints [7, 62, 90], sil- houettes
[16, 61], or body-part segmentation masks .
Learning-based methods directly infer body-model param- eters from images
[17, 40, 46, 48, 68, 78] or videos
[36, 39].
However, some methods infer bodies in model-free fashion as vertices
[41, 51, 52] or via implicit functions
[56, 70, 89].
Recent work [18, 24, 50] uses transformers for robust infer- ence; here we use the OSX model. .
3D Objects from single images The field has extensively studied estimating 3D objects from images.
To this end, it has used explicit 3D rep- resentations such as voxels
[13, 22], point clouds or meshes , but recently also implicit representations to represent objects of varied topologies
[1, 3, 94].
Here, we focus on recent learning-based methods made possible by 3D object-shape datasets
[84, 85], as a detailed review is beyond our scope.
However, such methods can only tackle limited object categories present in training datasets.
Recent work goes beyond limited categories by using text-to-image diffusion models [67, 69] and large-scale 3D datasets
[14, 15].
Zero-1-to-3 re-trains a 2D diffusion model to build a viewpoint-conditioned 3D diffusion model.
Others combine 2D and 3D diffusion models .
Despite promising results, all these methods require objects to be unoccluded in images, which is unrealistic for HOI.
While text-to-3D models
[49, 63] do not have this problem, accu- rately describing objects in text is often difficult.
To address these issues, we harness recent foundation models that build a joint latent space for several modal- ities.
We exploit this space for efficient retrieval via nearest- neighbor search.
PointBind and OpenShape do this for text, 3D point clouds (and by extension meshes), and images.
Here we use OpenShape to efficiently retrieve a likely 3D object mesh given an image crop around an object; this works even with some occlusion. .
3D Humans and objects from single images Compared to inferring only humans or only objects, jointly inferring them is less explored.
To support this direction several datasets have been captured either outdoors or indoors [6, 29, 32] or have been created through synthe- sis ; but these all consider only constrained settings.
Learned methods [60, 75, 82, 86–88] trained on such data either directly regress humans and objects jointly [60, 88] or first infer contact as a proxy and then exploit this proxy for optimization-based fitting [75, 86, 87].
There has been significantly less work addressing in- the-wild settings.
For example, PHOSA infers a hu- man mesh with an off-the-shelf model, retrieves an ob- ject mesh via mask-based database search, and refines its pose via hand-crafted category-wise contact constraints.
Wang et al. follow a similar strategy, but replace PHOSA’s hand-crafted constraints with coarse contact in- formation automatically inferred through an LLM.
Both lack category-wise and LLM-based contacts, however, image-grounding, resulting in inaccurate HOI reconstruc- tion.
In contrast, PICO-fit’s inferred contacts consider the input image and generalize to significantly more diverse ob- jects than previous methods.
Moreover, while PHOSA uses a single scale per class, we use instance-specific scale in- ferred directly from pixels.
3 .
3D Contact estimation regions of Studying contact has a long history
[5, 35].
For exam- ple, ObMan generates synthetic grasps and uses these to learn likely contacts.
In contrast, ContactDB real hands grasping 3D- captures contact printed objects via thermal imaging, while other work uses alternative means [42, 95, 96], such as marker- based Motion Capture [21, 76] or multi-view RGB-D .
Such work creates datasets for training methods to pre- dict, refine, and associate contacts for pose optimization
[9, 25, 33, 43, 81, 91, 98].
But these datasets are captured in the lab, so methods trained on them do not generalize.
COMA and CHORUS train on synthetic data to predict separate human and object contact distributions, and get rough correspondences via heuristic thresholds on prox- imity/orientation.
Instead, PICO-db uses fine manually-set contact correspondences on real, natural images.
More recently, DECO , EgoChoir and LEMON crowd-source contact areas in natural images through online “vertex painting” tools.
DECO annotators “paint” contact only on the body, while LEMONand EgoChoir an- notate on both the human and the object in separate pro- cesses; that is, the body and object contacts do not need to correspond.
We avoid painting contacts on objects by devel- oping a novel method that projects DECO’s body contacts onto objects with minimal human effort.
Crucially, this also establishes bijective body-object contact correspondences.
This goes beyond lab
[6, 31, 32] or synthetic
[75, 88] data, or part-level contacts , and serves 3D reconstruction.
3. PICO-db Dataset Training robust 3D HOI methods requires natural images paired with both 3D human and object contacts.
The DAMON dataset pairs natural images [27, 47] with vertex-level contacts on the SMPL body, but it lacks 3D object shapes and object contact.
To address this, we build a novel method that re- trieves matching 3D object meshes given in-the-wild im- ages (Sec. ), and projects DAMON’s body-only contacts onto the retrieved mesh (Sec. ).
We scale this for crowd- sourcing contact annotations on the internet (Sec. ).
This results in PICO-db, the first dataset that pairs in-the-wild images with 3D object shapes and contacts on both bodies and objects, as well as correspondences between them. .
3D Object shape retrieval We use OpenShape , a model with a joint latent space for images and 3D shapes.
Offline, we embed the meshes of the Objaverse-LVIS database into this space.
Online, we embed each test image into this space and find the 3 closest object latent codes via cosine-similarity.
Out of 3 options, an annotator picks the one best matching the image. .
Example contact patches with their contact axis. .
Contact representation & projection DAMON’s body contacts form neighboring-vertex patches.
We follow “ContactEdit” and represent such patches with a contact “axis” (see Fig. 3), i.e. an open curve on the patch surface.
Since every patch vertex can be parameter- ized with its contact axis, transferring patches to another surface boils down to transferring only the axis.
Thus, the axis lets us completely unpack body contact patches onto an object with just two clicks, which define the axis start loca- tion and direction, respectively.
Crucially, this also defines bijective point correspondences.
For details, see Sup.
Mat.
However, this approach has two key drawbacks.
First, although ContactEdit infers a default axis, it is originally designed for 3D professionals , who can “redraw” the default axis when it is non-intuitive.
This is challenging and time-consuming for non-experts.
We tackle this by auto- matically computing a high-quality default axis per patch.
To this end, for each body patch, we perform Principal Component Analysis on its vertex locations.
Then, starting from the mean, we take positive and negative steps in the direction of the most significant component, and project the resulting two points onto the body surface via closest point queries .
An axis is generated by tracing a geodesic be- tween the two points, while all intermediate triangle edge- crossings serve as axis way-points.
Second, this approach struggles for contact patches on fine and highly non-convex body areas, such as fingers.
Specifically, when synthesizing a patch axis, tracing a “straight” geodesic is hard due to surface concavities.
Thus, the axis seems stretched out when transferred to more planar object regions, which confuses annotators and also distorts patches.
To tackle this, we create a proxy SMPL mesh with webbed fingers by computing convex hulls for hands; see image in Sup.
Mat.
This is a simple, yet effective solution. .
Collecting PICO-db annotations The contact transfer method of Sec.  runs in real time and is user-friendly.
Thus, we embed this into an interactive web-browser tool.
For each DAMON image, we automat- ically parameterize its 3D body contacts (via contact axes) and also retrieve a 3D object shape (see Sec. ).
Then, we crowd-source annotations for transferring body contacts onto retrieved objects via Amazon Mechanical Turk.
4
Specifically, for each body-contact patch, annotators click two points on the object mesh – the first click specifies the start of the contact axis and the second click specifies its orientation.
Then, the tool instantly displays the transferred contact on the object for visual feedback.
Annotators can correct errors by repeating the two clicks (overwriting past efforts).
The tool has features such as mesh rotation, zoom in/out, view reset, and a menu for modifying a previously- annotated contact patch.
For a detailed visualization and discussion, see Sup.
Mat.
and the video on our website.
PICO-db statistics.
We annotate 4123 images, span- ning 44 object categories and 627 object instances.
To en- sure high quality, we select proficient annotators via a qual- ification process and continuously review their work.
For detailed statistics and quality checks, see Sup.
Mat. 4. PICO-fit Method
We develop PICO-fit, a novel method that, given an image I, recovers a 3D human and object mesh realistically reg- istered w.r.t.
each other.
Learning this is intractable due to the lack of 3D HOI datasets.
Thus, we leverage contact correspondences between the body and the object to fit 3D meshes to images.
But this is hard due to strong occlusions and depth ambiguities.
We tackle these via a careful initial- ization and three-stage fitting (see Fig. 4) as follows. .
Initialization Body shape & pose initialization.
We apply the OSX regressor on image I to infer a SMPL-X body mesh, H, with initial pose θ∗, that has articulated hands.
gj ·gin Object shape initialization.
We apply the method of Sec. , i.e., we use the OpenShape model that embeds images and 3D shapes into a single latent space, G. Offline, we embed into G the Objaverse-LVIS meshes; for each object mesh Oi, we get a latent code gi.
Then, we embed image I to get the latent code gin and find the closest code ∥gj ∥∥gin∥ , encoding the object mesh Oj to it, gj = argmaxj that best matches the image.
This is automatic, fast, robust to some occlusions, preserves 3D details, scales well, and easily handles new object classes as databases get richer.
We initialize scale, s∗ o, via GPT-4V; see details in Sup.
Mat.
Contact initialization.
For PICO-db images, we use the associated annotations.
For unlabeled images, we need to infer contact correspondences.
However, no method can in- fer contact correspondences on the object w.r.t.
the body, due to the huge object shape variance.
Our key insight is to exploit 3D contact on bodies, which is easier to infer, as key to “query” the respective object contact from PICO-db.
To this end, we infer vertex-level body contact via DECO .
But this is often noisy, as this problem is unsolved.
Thus, we further ask GPT-4V “which ⟨body part⟩ is in con- tact with the ⟨object⟩” to reduce false negatives (in general), and false positives on feet (DECO’s bias); for details see 5 Sup.
Mat.
The estimated contact helps “query” PICO-db to retrieve the closest body-contact annotation that maximizes the intersection-over-union (IoU) between these.
This is in- spired by seminal work showing that nearest-neighbor retrieval from a rich database can be better than regression.
Since PICO-db body contact is paired with 3D object shape, object contact, and body-object contact correspon- dences, we also retrieve these for free to initialize PICO-fit. .
Stage 1: Registering object to body via contact At this point, we have initialized 3D body shape and pose, 3D object shape, and body-object contacts.
However, the object pose remains unknown.
To tackle this, we keep the human fixed and use contact correspondences to solve for object pose, i.e., rotation, Ro ∈ R3, and translation, to ∈ R3.
In detail, we use body-to-object (vertex-to-point) correspondences S := {(vi, pi)} where vi ∈ H are human- mesh vertices, while pi ∈ O are points (that might lie inside triangles) on the object surface.
Then, we estimate Ro and to and register the object to the body by minimizing a con- tact loss: L1 = Lc = 1 |S| (vi,pi)∈S ∥vi − pi∥2.
(cid:80)
However, all regressors are imperfect, so OSX-inferred bodies can be noisy, especially for challenging images.
This also affects object pose.
So, after stage 1, human and object meshes might be image-misaligned and need refinement.
To avoid chicken-and-egg problems in joint refinement, we first refine the object (stage 2) and then the body (stage 3).
Empirically, an extra joint-refinement stage does not help. .
Stage 2: Aligning the object to the image Here we refine the object to align with the image.
First, we render the object mesh, O, into a 2D object mask, ¯Mo, via an OSX-inferred camera and the PyTorch3D renderer.
Then, we detect in image I an object mask, Mo, via SAM .
Last, with IoU(·) denoting Intersection-over-Union, o = 1 − IoU(Mo, ¯Mo).
we define the object mask loss:
Lm However, this might cause human-object penetrations, as it ignores the relative 3D human-object arrangement.
We tackle this here.
Let Ωh be a Signed Distance Field (SDF) around the human mesh, H. For a 3D point, Ωh has values proportional to the distance from H, with a positive sign for points inside H and negative outside H.
Then, the penetration loss , Lp = (cid:80) vi∈O Ωh(vi), runs over all object vertices, vi, paying a penalty, Ωh(x, y, z) = −min(SDF(x, y, z), 0), when vi penetrates the body.
Note that related work
[62, 86, 97] penalizes only shallow penetrations and misses extreme ones, in contrast to our Lp.
o∥2, to refine the scale based on image evidence (see Lm o above) while not deviating much from the initial estimate, s∗ o.
We also define an object scale loss, Ls o = ∥so
− s∗ We optimize over object rotation, Ro, translation, to, and scale, so ∈ R. With λ denoting steering weights tuned em- pirically, we minimize: L2 = λcLc+λpLp+λm oLs o. o +λs o Lm .
Overview of PICO-fit, a novel method for fitting interacting 3D body and object meshes to an image.
It initializes (Sec. )
3D body shape and pose via OSX , 3D object shape via OpenShape , and body-object contacts via retrieval from PICO-db (Sec. 3).
Then, it takes three steps: It exploits contacts to solve for object pose, to register the object to the body (Sec. ).
It refines object pose (Sec. ) and body pose (Sec. )
to align these to an object and human mask, respectively, detected in the image while satisfying contacts and avoiding penetrations.
For every stage we show inputs, outputs, losses, and optimizable variables.
(cid:252) Zoom in to see details. .
Stage 3: Refining the human pose The goal is to refine the contact between the human and the pixel-aligned object from Stage 2.
To this end, we employ the contact loss Lc to optimize the human pose.
However, this loss alone does not provide enough constraints and may lead to implausible poses.
Thus, we add two regularizers.
First, we define a human mask loss, like the object one in Stage 2.
Using the same camera as for objects, we ren-
der the human mesh, H, as a 2D mask, ¯Mh.
We also detect in image I a human mask, Mh, via SAM .
Then, with IoU(·) denoting Intersection-over-Union, the mask loss is h = 1 − IoU(Mh, ¯Mh).
But minimizing Lm
Lm h by optimiz- ing over θ produces distorted bodies due to depth ambiguity.
To tackle this we need another regularizer, Lr = ∥θ − θ∗∥2, so that pose θ does not deviate much from the initial θ∗. Interestingly, we observe that the initial body has a good torso pose, but errors increase towards end effectors.
Thus, we optimize only the pose parameters for the limbs after the torso until the ones contacting the object.
Assuming just one contacting limb for notational simplicity, let C = {Jr, Jr+1, . . .
, Jc} be the joints from the closest torso joint, Jr, to the contacting joint, Jc, along the kinematic chain.
Then, we only optimize over θC = {θr, θr+1, . . .
, θc}.
With λ denoting steering weights tuned empirically, we mini- mize: L3 = λcLc + λpLp + λm h + λθC LθC .
h
Lm 5.
Experiments Existing 3D HOI recovery methods [60, 86, 88] perform well on datasets they train on.
However, they fail for out- of-domain (OOD) scenarios, i.e.: unseen in-lab datasets, and unseen in-the-wild images; the latter is the main fo- cus of our work.
Thus, we compare our PICO-fit method with both regression-based HOI reconstruction methods, i.e., CONTHO and HDM , and an optimization- based one, i.e., PHOSA , on these tasks.
6 Methods Ref.
Type HDM CONTHO PHOSA CONTHO∗ PHOSA∗ Reg.
Reg.
Opt.
Reg.
Opt.
PICO-fit PICO-fit∗ Ours Opt.
Ours Opt.
GT con- tact ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ PA-CDh (cm) ↓
PA-CDo (cm) ↓               InterCap DAMON PA-CDh+o X vs PICO-fit∗ Pref.
Rate (%) (cm) ↓         vs  - -  vs   vs   vs  ∅ .
Evaluation on 3D HOI reconstruction.
Middle column: Evaluation on InterCap (Sec. ).
Since no method trains on InterCap, this evaluates generalization.
Right column: Evaluation on in-the-wild images via a perceptual study (Sec. ).
We report the preference rate of results from the competing method (denoted as “X”) over our PICO-fit∗. Left column: “Type” denotes regres- sion or optimization.
Using GT contact is highlighted with ∗. Datasets.
To evaluate 3D HOI reconstruction, two in-lab datasets are widely used, InterCap and BEHAVE .
These provide multi-view RGB-D images paired with 3D ground-truth (GT) bodies and objects in interaction, with 10 and 20 objects, respectively.
Most methods train on BEHAVE.
So, we use BEHAVE-trained checkpoints for existing methods, and evaluate generalization to InterCap.
Metrics.
Following past work [60, 86, 87], we report the Procrustes-Aligned (PA) Chamfer Distance (CD).
We com- pute this separately on the SMPL-X body (PA-CDh) and object mesh (PA-CDo), after first performing PA to align the combined human+object mesh with the GT meshes. .
3D HOI reconstruction – OOD in-lab datasets We evaluate PICO-fit and SotA methods on InterCap and report results in Tab.
1.
The CONTHO model trains on BEHAVE, while HDM trains on ProciGen , a synthetic dataset building on BEHAVE and InterCap.
So, with the exception of HDM, InterCap is unseen for all models.
Thus, we evaluate generalizability for OOD in-lab images.
Stage 1: Object-to-Body Registration Stage 2: Object-Image AlignmentStage 3: Human-Image AlignmentHuman-Object ContactObject MeshHuman MeshPhase 1
OutputOverlaid ResultPhase 1
OutputPhase 2 OutputOverlaid ResultObject MaskHuman-Object ContactHuman-Object ContactHuman MaskPhase 2 OutputOverlaid ResultPhase 3 OutputOptimize: ObjectOptimize: ObjectOptimize: HumanStage 2: Image GroundingStage 3: Human Optimization Stage IDs Losses Optimized Lc Lo,m Lp Lh,m Variables ✓ 1 ✓ 1+2 1+2+3 (PICO-fit) ✓ Ro, to Ro, to, so Ro, to, so, θC ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ Procrustes-Aligned (PA) CDh ↓ CDo ↓ CDh+o ↓          .
Ablation study for PICO-fit’s three fitting stages.
We evaluate on the InterCap dataset, and report the Procrustes-
Aligned Chamfer Distance (PA-CD) for the human (h), object (o), and their combination (h+o).
The middle columns show the losses and optimized variables.
For qualitative ablation, see Sup.
Mat.
Qualitative evaluation.
In Fig. 6 we qualitatively com- pare PICO-fit∗ with SotA methods on DAMON images, only for object categories handled by all baselines.
In Fig. 7 we show PICO-fit∗ reconstructions on object categories that no previous method can handle.
Finally, in Fig.
5, we qual- itatively compare PICO-fit with PHOSA, namely the most related SotA method to ours, on the same internet images used in the PHOSA paper .
We show qualitative com- parisons of PICO-fit with other baselines in Sup.
Mat.
These results show that PICO-fit is more robust and gen- eralizes to challenging natural images better than existing methods.
Note that PICO-fit handles several object classes for the first time, due to efficient retrieval from PICO-db. .
Ablation study We evaluate the contribution of PICO-fit’s stages in Tab.
2.
This shows that each stage contributes meaningfully, as the accuracy significantly improves for the optimized elements, while non-optimized ones either improve or, in the worst- case, remain practically unchanged.
For quantitative ab- lations on alternate optimization strategies and qualitative ablations on the effect of each PICO-fit stage, see Sup.
Mat. 6.
Conclusions and Future Work
Our work emphasizes how contact, on both the human body and the objects it interacts with, is a foundation for reason- ing about 3D HOI.
Specifically, we build a new dataset that uniquely pairs natural images with 3D contacts on both the body and the object.
Using this, we develop a novel method that exploits contacts to reconstruct 3D HOI from a single image.
Our method handles object classes that no existing method handles, via efficient retrieval from our rich dataset.
The next step is to make 3D contact estimation more general, efficient, and robust.
To that end, we plan to ex- pand and leverage our dataset of in-the-wild contact la- bels to train a direct contact regressor.
Specifically, we will leverage PICO-fit to automate the creation of pseudo ground truth training labels.
With sufficient training data we should be able to replace our nearest-neighbor lookup from PICO-db with a feed-forward model.
Last, we will explore vision-language models to go beyond finite datasets. .
Qualitative comparison of PICO-fit vs PHOSA on inter- net images used for evaluation in the PHOSA paper .
Further, we ablate the impact of using ground-truth (GT) 3D contacts extracted from GT human and object InterCap meshes with a distance threshold of 5 cm.
This simulates perfect contact “detection” to provide an upper bound on accuracy.
Methods that use GT contact are highlighted with a star (∗); see details for each method in Sup.
Mat.
When GT contact is available, PICO-fit∗ significantly outperforms all baselines.
However, even PICO-fit, which does not use GT contact, performs on par with PHOSA∗ and CONTHO∗, demonstrating its robustness. .
3D HOI reconstruction – In-the-wild images We evaluate PICO-fit∗ against SotA methods on in-the-wild images through a perceptual study conducted on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
We randomly select 75 images from 42 object categories in the DAMON dataset, and evaluate each method on these samples.
Participants are shown an image at the center, along with reconstructions from PICO-fit∗ and baselines, randomly shuffled to the left and right side.
The participants mark which of the two reconstructions best reflects the image, while focusing on the 3D human-object contact and spatial alignment.
For details about the study, see Sup.
Mat.
Note that CONTHO∗ is only trained on 9 object classes.
To ensure fair comparison, we evaluate CONTHO∗ on 30 images that span only these specific 9 objects.
Note also that HDM outputs a point cloud, while our PICO-fit∗ produces meshes.
To avoid introducing any visualization bias, we convert PICO-fit∗ meshes to point clouds.
We report results in Tab. 1 (right), in the form of “X vs PICO-fit∗”, indicating the percentage of times a competing method (“X”) was preferred over our method.
On average, participants deemed reconstructions produced by PICO-fit∗ to be more realistic over baselines % of the time.
7 RGB ImagePHOSA PICO-fit (ours) .
Qualitative evaluation of CONTHO∗, HDM and PHOSA∗ alongside PICO-fit∗ on object categories handled by all baselines.
From left to right: input image, pseudo-GT contact annotations in PICO-db, and 3D reconstructions (a side and top-down view per method).
Reconstructions from PICO-fit∗ have better 3D human-object contact and spatial alignment.
For more comparisons, see Sup.
Mat. .
HOI reconstructions from PICO-fit∗ on new, previously untackled object categories.
Each row (left to right) shows, for three input RGB images, PICO-fit∗’s estimated meshes overlaid on the image (camera view) and a side view.
For more results, see Sup.
Mat. 8 RGB ImageCONTHO* HDM PHOSA* PICO-fit* (ours)PICO-db contact