MirrorVerse: Pushing Diffusion Models to Realistically Reflect the World

Ankit Dhiman1,2* Manan Shah1* R Venkatesh Babu1

1Vision and AI Lab, IISc Bangalore

2Samsung R & D Institute India - Bangalore

5
2
0
2

r
p
A
1
2

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
9
3
5
1
.
4
0
5
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1. Our model MirrorFusion 2.0, trained on our enhanced dataset SynMirrorV2 surpasses previous state-of-the-art diffusion-based
inpainting models at the task of generating mirror reflections. All images were created by appending the prompt: “A perfect plane mirror
reflection of ” to the object description. All text prompts can be found in the supplementary.

Abstract

Diffusion models have become central to various image
editing tasks, yet they often fail to fully adhere to physi-
cal laws, particularly with effects like shadows, reflections,
and occlusions. In this work, we address the challenge of
generating photorealistic mirror reflections using diffusion-
based generative models. Despite extensive training data,
existing diffusion models frequently overlook the nuanced
details crucial to authentic mirror reflections. Recent ap-
proaches have attempted to resolve this by creating syn-
thetic datasets and framing reflection generation as an in-
painting task; however, they struggle to generalize across
different object orientations and positions relative to the

*Equal Contribution.

mirror. Our method overcomes these limitations by intro-
ducing key augmentations into the synthetic data pipeline:
(1) random object positioning, (2) randomized rotations,
and (3) grounding of objects, significantly enhancing gener-
alization across poses and placements. To further address
spatial relationships and occlusions in scenes with multi-
ple objects, we implement a strategy to pair objects dur-
ing dataset generation, resulting in a dataset robust enough
to handle these complex scenarios. Achieving generaliza-
tion to real-world scenes remains a challenge, so we intro-
duce a three-stage training curriculum to develop the Mir-
rorFusion 2.0 model to improve real-world performance.
We provide extensive qualitative and quantitative evalua-
tions to support our approach. The project page is available
at: https://mirror-verse.github.io/.

1

a) SD generations b) HD-Painterc) MirrorFusiond) OursMaska)Input 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Our proposed dataset, SynMirrorV2, surpasses existing
mirror datasets in terms of attribute diversity and variability. While
recent work [12] introduced the synthetic SynMirror dataset, it
lacks key augmentations and scenario, limiting its performance in
complex and real-world settings (See Fig. 1).

Dataset

Type

Size (#Images)

Attributes

MSD [52]
Mirror-NeRF [55]
DLSU-OMRS [15]
TROSD [44]
PMD [24]
RGBD-Mirror [28]
Mirror3D [45]

Real
Real & Synthetic
Real
Real
Real
Real
Real

SynMirror [12]

Synthetic

SynMirrorV2 (Ours)

Synthetic with Single &
Multiple Objects

4,018
9 scenes
454
11,060
6,461
3,049
7,011

198,204

207,610

RGB, Masks
RGB, Masks, Multi-View
RGB, Mask
RGB, Mask
RGB, Masks
RGB, Depth
RGB, Masks, Depth
Single Fixed Objects: RGB, Depth,
Masks, Normals, Multi-View

Single + Multiple Objects: RGB, Depth,
Masks, Normals, Multi-View, Augmentations

This limitation stems from the models’ reliance on poorly
learned priors, a consequence of the quality and quantity
of their training data. The scarcity of high-quality, real-
world images featuring mirrors and their reflections, as ev-
idenced in Tab. 1, poses a significant challenge. While re-
cent work [12] has attempted to address this issue by train-
ing on a synthetic dataset, the results, as illustrated in Fig. 1,
suggest that the method’s performance suffers in complex
scenes and real-world settings. We hypothesize that this is
due to inherent limitations in the synthetic data generation
process and the training dynamics of the model.

To address the shortcomings in the synthetic data gener-
ation pipeline, we create an enhanced pipeline incorporat-
ing useful augmentations such as randomizing object po-
sition and rotation. We also ensure that the objects are
anchored to the ground level in the 3D world. We ob-
serve that this diverse data improves the generalization of
a trained model across the pose and position of objects in
the scene. However, it does not generalize to more complex
scenes with multiple objects. To address this, we propose
a novel pipeline that places multiple objects in the scene
based on their semantic categories, further enhancing the
quality and utility of the proposed synthetic dataset. Draw-
ing inspiration from previous works, such as those that have
improved the generation quality on various tasks, notably
image-editing [29], multilingual T2I generation [23, 50, 53]
and several others, we aim to leverage the stage-wise train-
ing approach that enhanced the results in these methods.

We briefly sum up our contributions as follows:

• We propose SynMirrorV2, a large-scale synthetic dataset
with diversity in objects and their relative position and
orientation in the scene.

• Further, we create a pipeline to add multiple objects to a

scene in SynMirrorV2.

• We show that with a curriculum strategy of training
on SynMirrorV2, a generative method can also generalize
to real-world scenes. We show this generalization capa-
bility on the challenging real-world MSD [52] dataset.

Figure 2. We observe that current state-of-the-art T2I models,
SD3.5 [2] (top row) and Flux [22] (bottom row), face significant
challenges in producing consistent and geometrically accurate re-
flections when prompted to generate reflections in the scene.

1. Introduction

In recent years, diffusion-based generative models have re-
defined what is possible in fields spanning from image
generation to video synthesis, producing impressive re-
sults across various applications [14, 17, 18, 22, 35, 38].
The evolution of these models has been accompanied by
a range of methods designed to fine-tune the generation
process through conditional inputs, such as edge maps,
sketches, depth maps, and segmentation maps [30, 54, 56,
58]. However, there remains a significant gap in their ca-
pacity to replicate intricate physical effects—particularly
those rooted in the subtlety of real-world physics, includ-
ing shadows [41], specular reflections [49], and perspective
cues [46]. More challenging still, these techniques struggle
to authentically generate mirror reflections, a task requir-
ing a nuanced understanding of light, geometry, and real-
ism that current methods do not adequately address. In this
work, we address the question: “Can current methods be
fine-tuned to generate plausible mirror reflections?”

We motivate the problem further by providing genera-
tions from current text-to-image (T2I) generation models.
We prompt Stable Diffusion 3.5 [2] and FLUX [22] with
prompts to generate a scene with a mirror reflection. Fig. 2
shows that these methods fail to generate plausible mir-
ror reflections. Specifically, check the reflection of “teddy-
bear” in the generated outputs from both the methods. Fur-
ther, inpainting methods like HD-Painter [27] also fail for
this task, as shown in Fig. 1. A contemporary method called
MirrorFusion [12], claiming to generate mirror reflections,
falls short on real-world and challenging scenes as apparent
in Fig. 1.

Despite their impressive capabilities, powerful diffusion
models struggle to generate mirror reflections accurately.

2

‘A perfect plane mirror reflection of a mug which is placed in front of the mirror.’’‘A perfect plane mirror reflection of a stuffed toy bear which is placed in front of the mirror.’’‘A perfect plane mirror reflection of a chair model which is placed in front of the mirror.’’Stable Diffusion 3.5Flux2. Related Work

3. Dataset

Image Generative models. Diffusion models [43] have be-
come quite popular for image generation tasks. Diffusion
models work by gradually adding noise to data and then
learning to reverse this process to generate data from a vari-
ety of distributions [8, 11, 17]. Subsequent works have ex-
panded the scope of image generation by incorporating text
guidance [37, 40] into the diffusion process, simplifying the
reverse process [48], and reformulating diffusion to occur
in a latent space [38] for improved speed. [31] explore ad-
vancements in diffusion models by addressing bias through
distribution-guided debiasing techniques. Further, meth-
ods [32, 33] are developed to provide more fine-grained
generation control to these models. Building on the success
of vision transformers [47], recent approaches [7, 34, 60]
have replaced the U-Net architecture in diffusion models
with transformer-based designs, leading to high-quality im-
age generation results. Further, there are popular meth-
ods [2, 22] for high-quality image generation. However,
these methods also fail for the task of generating reflections
on the mirror as shown in Fig. 2
Image Inpainting. Building on the advancements in im-
age diffusion models, methods like Palette [39] and Re-
paint [26] leverage known regions through the denois-
ing process to reconstruct missing parts. Blended Diffu-
sion [3, 4] refines this approach by replacing noise in un-
masked areas with known content but struggles with com-
plex scenes and shapes. Stable-Diffusion Inpainting [38]
(SDI) enhances results by fine-tuning the denoiser with
noisy latents, masks, and masked images. Recent methods,
such as HD-Painter [27], PowerPaint [61], SmartBrush [51]
build on SDI with additional training. Recently, Brush-
Net [20] introduces a plug-and-play architecture that pre-
serves unmasked content while improving coherence with
textual prompts. However, Fig. 1 highlights the limitations
of these methods in generating reflections on the mirror.
Diffusion Models and 3D concepts. Recently, LRM [19]
based methods predict 3D model from a single image.
Some methods [21] utilize diffusion-based methods to en-
able editing of these 3D presentations. Other diffusion-
based methods [29] use synthetic image pairs for 3D-aware
image editing. However, the synthetic-to-real domain gap
can limit their applicability. Further, ObjectDrop [49] trains
a diffusion model for object insertion/removal using a coun-
terfactual dataset that can handle shadows and specular re-
flections. Sarkar et al. [41] shows that generated images
have different geometric features such as shadows and re-
flections from the real images. Upadhyay et al. [46] pro-
posed a geometric constraint in the training process to im-
prove the perspective cues in the generated images. Al-
chemist [42] provides control over the material properties
of an object by proposing an object-centric synthetic dataset
with physically-based materials.

3.1. Data Generation Pipeline

Fig. 2 highlights the failure of state-of-the-art models in
handling the reflection generation task. MirrorFusion [12]
addresses this challenge by proposing a synthetic dataset
but struggles in complex scenarios involving multiple ob-
jects and real-world scenes ( Fig. 1). We attribute this limi-
tation to the lack of diversity in their dataset. To mitigate
these shortcomings, we introduce SynMirrorV2, a large-
scale dataset which significantly expands diversity with var-
ied backgrounds, floor textures, objects, camera poses, mir-
ror orientation, object positions, and rotations. Tab. 1 com-
pares existing mirror datasets, while Fig. 3 showcases sam-
ples from SynMirrorV2.
Object Sources. We source objects from Objaverse [9] and
Amazon Berkeley Objects (ABO) [6] datasets. Objaverse, a
large-scale dataset, contains 800K diverse 3D assets, while
ABO contributes 7, 953 common household objects. To en-
sure quality, we refine our selection using a curated list of
64K objects from OBJECT 3DIT [29] and the filtering pro-
cedure discussed in [12], eliminating low-quality textures
and sub-par renderings. After filtering, we get 58, 109 ob-
jects from Objaverse. In total, we utilize 66, 062 objects.
Scene Resources. To create a realistic scene, we require
assets such as a mirror, floor and background. We cre-
ate a plane for the floor and apply diverse textures sourced
from CC-textures [10]. We use HDRI samples provided by
PolyHaven [16] to represent the background. In our exper-
iments, we use different kinds of mirrors: full-wall mirrors
and tall rectangular mirrors. For lighting, we position an
area-light slightly above and behind the object at a 45◦ an-
gle, directing it towards both the object and the mirror.
Object Placement in the scene. To begin, we fix the mir-
ror’s position within the scene as a fixed reference point.
The sampled object is then scaled to fit within a unit cube,
ensuring uniformity in size across all objects. We proceed
by sampling the object’s x-y position from a pre-computed
region that guarantees both visibility of the object in the
mirror and camera. This pre-computed region is determined
by identifying the intersection between the mirror’s viewing
frustum and the camera’s viewing frustum. Once the posi-
tion is set, we randomly sample an angle for the object’s
rotation around the y-axis to introduce variability. How-
ever, even with these steps, there may be instances where
the object appears to float in the air, which can undermine
the dataset’s utility. To address this, we apply a straightfor-
ward grounding technique, detailed in the supplementary
material. Together, these strategies contribute to the diver-
sity and overall quality of the proposed dataset.
Multiple Objects. A typical scene includes multiple ob-
jects arranged in varied layouts, producing a range of depth
and occlusion scenarios that enhance scene realism. To

3

Figure 3. Dataset Generation Pipeline. Our dataset generation pipeline introduces key augmentations such as random positioning,
rotation, and grounding of objects within the scene using the 3D-Positioner. Additionally, we pair objects in semantically consistent
combinations to simulate complex spatial relationships and occlusions, capturing realistic interactions for multi-object scenes.

Algorithm 1 Procedure to Render Multiple Objects
Require: Input 3D model M1

1: Function GETPAIREDOBJECTCATEGORY(M )
2: c ← GetSemanticCategory(M )
3: L ← GetPairedCategoriesList(c)
4: cpaired ← SampleCategory(L)
5: return cpaired
6: Function SAMPLEOBJECT(c)
7: Lobj ← GetListObjects(c)
8: M ← Sample3DObject(Lobj)
9: return M
10: Main Algorithm
11: cpaired ← GETPAIREDOBJECTCATEGORY(M1)
12: M2 ← SAMPLEOBJECT(cpaired)
13: Initialize position of M2 at X
14: while M2 collides with M1 do
15:
16: X ← Tr
17: end while

Tr ← SampleRandomPosition()

capture this complexity, our dataset incorporates scenes
with multiple objects, as described in Algorithm 1. We
start by sampling K objects from the original ABO dataset
and identifying each object’s class from [6]. Categories
are manually paired to ensure semantic coherence—for in-
stance, pairing a chair with a table. During rendering, af-
ter positioning and rotating the primary object K1, an addi-
tional object K2 from the paired category is sampled and ar-
ranged to prevent overlap, ensuring distinct spatial regions
within the scene. This process yields 3,140 scenes featuring
diverse object configurations and spatial relationships, pro-
viding a robust foundation for realistic scene representation.

4

Rendering. Following scene composition, we randomly
sample three camera poses from a predefined list of 19 cam-
era positions and render each scene using BlenderProc [10]
to obtain RGB, depth, normal, and semantic label outputs.
All renderings are produced at a resolution of 512×512 pix-
els. We set the “cycles rendering” parameter to 1024, which
is necessary for accurately capturing reflections. Represen-
tative samples are provided in Fig. 3 and additional exam-
ples are available in the supplementary material.

4. Method

Preliminaries Diffusion models are generative models
that can construct data samples by progressively remov-
ing noise. In the forward diffusion process, Gaussian noise
ϵ ∼ N (0, 1) is incrementally added to an initial clean sam-
ple x0 over T timesteps to create a noisy sample xT . In
the reverse process, a clean image x0 is reconstructed by
iteratively denoising xT . This denoising process is carried
out by a denoising network ϵθ which is conditioned on the
timestep t ∈ {1, T } and optional additional conditioning c
(e.g. text prompts, inpainting masks). Training loss of the
denoiser is as follows:

LDM = Ex0,ϵ∼N (0,I),t||ϵ − ϵθ (zt, t, c) ||2

(1)

Model Architecture. Building upon MirrorFusion [12],
we also formulate this task as an inpainting task. Our model
employs a base dual branch network similar to Brush-
Net [20] and additionally uses depth map conditioning for
the condition branch of BrushNet. In particular, we con-
catenate the noisy latent zt, masked image zm, inpainting
mask xm and depth map xd, and provide this as an input to

Cycles Renderer3D-PositionerSceneCompositorFloor TexturesHDRIs3D ObjectsSampled Camera Posea)b)MirrorsFigure 4. Comparison on MirrorBenchV2. The baseline fails to
maintain accurate reflections and spatial consistency, showing (a)
incorrect chair orientation and (b) distorted reflections of multiple
objects.
In contrast, our method correctly renders (a) the chair
and (b) the sofas with accurate position, orientation, and structure,
demonstrating superior performance.

Figure 5. Comparison on GSO [13] dataset. In (a), the base-
line method misrepresents object structure, while our method pre-
serves spatial integrity and produces realistic reflections. In (b),
the baseline yields incomplete and distorted reflections of the mug,
whereas our approach generates accurate geometry, color, and de-
tail, showing superior performance on out-of-distribution objects.

the conditioning U-Net branch. Each layer of the generation
U-Net ϵi is conditioned with the corresponding layer of the
conditioning U-Net ϵ
with the help of zero-convolutions
(Z) as follows:

′

(cid:16)

′

(cid:17)

ϵ

ϵθ (zt, t, c)i = ϵθ (zt, t, c)i+w·Z

θ ([zt, zm, xm, xd] , t)i
(2)
w is the preservation scale to adjust the influence of condi-
tioning. We set w to be 1.0 for all our experiments. We,
train the model with the loss in Eq. (1).
Training details. We follow a 3 stage training curriculum
to improve the generalization of the model on real-world
scenes. We utilize the AdamW [25] optimizer with a learn-
ing rate of 1e−5 and a batch size of 4 per GPU. We train on
4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs in all stages.
• Stage 1.

In the first stage, we initialize the weights of
both the conditioning and generation branch with the Sta-
ble Diffusion v1.5 checkpoint and finetune the model on
the single object train split of our proposed SynMirrorV2.
In contrast to [12], we do not keep the generation branch
frozen and train the model till 40, 000 iterations. The
variation in the position and rotation in the SynMirrorV2
compared to SynMirror allows us to train the model for
longer iterations without any degradation in the genera-
tion quality compared to [12].

• Stage 2.

In the second stage, we finetune the model
for 10, 000 iterations on the multiple objects train split
of SynMirrorV2 to incorporate the concepts of occlusions
as present in realistic scenes.

• Stage 3. We propose a third stage training on real-world
data from the MSD [52] dataset for another 10, 000 it-
erations to bridge the domain gap between synthetic and
real-world image inpainting.
In the first two stages, we use ground truth depth maps
and for the third stage, we generate depth maps using a

5

monocular depth estimator [5]. To enhance learning and
reduce reliance on text prompts, we randomly drop them
20% of the time during training, enabling the model to uti-
lize depth information better.
Inference. During inference, we use a CFG value of 7.5 and
utilize the UniPC scheduler [59] for 50 time steps. During
inference, we allow the user to provide the mask depicting
the mirror and estimate the input depth map using Depth-
Pro [5] by passing the masked image as input.

5. Experiments & Results

We discuss the evaluation strategy and compare our current
method with the previous state-of-the-art method, Mirror-
Fusion [12], referring to this as the baseline. Additionally,
we also provide ablation studies on different design choices
in Sec. 5.1.
Dataset. Compared to MirrorBench, MirrorBenchV2 con-
sists of renderings of single and multiple objects in a scene.
Additionally, we qualitatively test our method on several
images from the MSD dataset and renderings from the
Google Scanned Objects(GSO) [13] dataset. For single ob-
ject renderings, we have a total of 2, 991 images, which
come from categories that are both seen and unseen dur-
ing training. We create 300 images that contain two objects
from the ABO dataset in the same scene to test the model
on generating reflections for multiple objects.
Metrics. We benchmark various methods on the quality of
the generated reflection and textual alignment of the gener-
ated image with the input prompt.
• Reflection Generation Quality. We evaluate reflection
quality using Peak-Signal-to-Noise ratio (PSNR), Struc-
tural Similarity (SSIM) and Learned Perceptual Image
Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [57] on the masked mirror re-
gion.

(a)(b)MirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOurs(a)(b)MirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOursFigure 6. Results on MirrorBenchV2. We compare our method with the baseline MirrorFusion [12] on MirrorBenchV2. The baseline
method shown struggles with pose variations, even in single-object scenes, and fails to produce accurate reflections for multiple objects.
In contrast, our method handles variations in the object orientation effectively and generates geometrically accurate reflections, even in
complex, multi-object scenarios.

• Text Alignment. We use CLIP [36] Similarity for assess-

ing textual alignment.

Qualitative results on MirrorBenchV2. In Fig. 4 (a), a
single chair that is slightly rotated is placed in front of a
mirror. We observe that the baseline method completely
misrepresents the chair’s orientation in the generated reflec-
tion as seen in the mirror. Notice the zoomed-in region
where the reflection appears as if the object was cut and
pasted onto the mirror. In contrast, MirrorFusion 2.0 trained
on SynMirrorV2 accurately captures the chair’s orientation
in the reflection, as shown in the zoomed-in region high-
lighted by the green circle.

Fig. 4 (b), shows a scene with a white sofa rotated and
placed to the right of a gray sofa. The baseline method pro-
duces two artifacts in the reflection: 1) the gray sofa ap-
pears to be floating in the air, and 2) the generated reflec-
tion of the white sofa is completely incorrect. In contrast,
our method accurately generates the scene in the reflection.
These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our augmen-

tation strategies, as described in Sec. 3. We show more ex-
amples with both single and multiple objects in Fig. 6.

Qualitative results on GSO [13]. We further evaluate
the generalization ability of MirrorFusion 2.0 on real-world
scanned objects from GSO, shown in Fig. 5. MirrorFusion
2.0 generates significantly more accurate and realistic re-
flections. For instance, in Fig. 5 (a), MirrorFusion 2.0 cor-
rectly reflects the drawer handles (highlighted in green),
while the baseline model produces an implausible reflection
(highlighted in red). Likewise, for the “White-Yellow mug”
in Fig. 5 (b), MirrorFusion 2.0 delivers a convincing geom-
etry with minimal artifacts, unlike the baseline, which fails
to accurately capture the object’s geometry and appearance.

Qualitative results on the Real-World MSD dataset.
MirrorFusion 2.0 performs well on MirrorBenchV2 and
real-world objects from GSO but struggles with complex
scenes, such as cluttered cables on a table and reflections
across multiple mirrors (see Fig. 7). To improve coher-
ence, we fine-tune it on a subset of the MSD dataset and

6

InputInputMirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOursSingle ObjectsMultiple ObjectsFigure 7. Real World Scenes. We show results for MirrorFusion [12], our method and our method fine-tuned on the MSD [52] dataset.
We observe that our method can generate reflections capturing the intricacies of complex scenes, such as a cluttered cable on the table and
the presence of two mirrors in a 3D scene.

test it on a held-out split, enhancing its ability to handle
real-world scenarios. As shown in Fig. 7, this fine-tuning
enables high-fidelity reflections, accurately capturing de-
tails like the “black cable” on the table and the “towel” in
both mirrors. These results demonstrate how our dataset im-
proves diffusion models, enabling more realistic reflections
in challenging settings. Fig. 7 illustrates further examples
on the real-world MSD dataset.
Quantitative results with baselines. For evaluating the
metrics, we generate images using four seeds for a particu-
lar prompt and select the image that has the best SSIM score
on the unmasked region. For a particular metric, we report
the average value across MirrorBenchV2 by averaging the
metric for all the selected images. Tabs. 2 and 3 show that

Table 2. Single Object Reflection Generation Quality. We com-
pare the quantitative results between the baseline and MirrorFu-
sion 2.0 on the single object split of MirrorBenchV2. The best
results are shown in bold. This shows the effectiveness of the
dataset by achieving improved scores.

Metrics

Models

Reflection Generation Quality

Text Alignment

PSNR ↑

SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

CLIP Sim ↑

baseline [12]
Ours 40k

18.31
18.79

0.76
0.77

0.122
0.108

26.00
25.96

our method outperforms the baseline method and finetuning
on multiple objects improves the results on complex scenes.

7

MirrorFusionOursOurs - FTMirrorFusionOursOurs - FTTable 3. Multiple Object Reflection Generation Quality. We
compare the quantitative results between MirrorFusion 2.0 trained
without multiple objects and MirrorFusion 2.0 trained with multi-
ple objects on the multiple object split of MirrorBenchV2. The
best results are shown in bold. This shows the effectiveness of
finetuning further on multiple objects.

Metrics

Reflection Generation Quality

Text Alignment

Models

PSNR ↑

SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

CLIP Sim ↑

Ours 40k
Ours 50k

17.77
18.00

0.743
0.744

0.126
0.119

26.17
26.09

Figure 9. Comparison with SDI+Depth baseline. We observe
color leakage issues in “SDI+Depth” generations. A dual-branch
architecture proves to be a better choice, yielding superior out-
comes.

Figure 8. Impact of adding multiple objects. We observe that
training without multiple objects leads to (a) poor reflection gen-
eration and (b) artifacts like object blending, supporting the need
for finetuning the model on such scenarios.

User study. To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed
strategy, we also conducted a user study where we provided
users with 40 different samples containing single, multiple,
GSO objects, and real-world generations from the baseline
and MirrorFusion 2.0. 84% of users preferred generations
from MirrorFusion 2.0 over the baseline method. We
provide more details in Appendix D.5.
Limitations. Fig. 10 illustrates examples where our method
accurately captures overall geometry but introduces minor
artifacts which can be easily addressed by synthesizing ad-
ditional training data and fine-tuning the model.

5.1. Ablation Studies

Impact of multiple objects dataset. To evaluate the im-
pact of adding multiple objects to our dataset, we com-
pare MirrorFusion 2.0 with ( “+ multiple”) and without (“-
multiple”) object training in Fig. 8.“ MirrorFusion 2.0-w/o
multiple” struggles to generate plausible mirror reflections,
as evident in Fig. 8 (b), where the bed and sofa appear to
blend together. In contrast,“ MirrorFusion 2.0-with multi-
ple” accurately captures the spatial relationships between
objects within the mirror reflection. These results highlight
the importance of including multiple objects in the dataset,
enabling the model to learn spatial relationships and effec-
tively handle occlusions.
Ablation on architecture. To further validate our architec-
tural choice, we adapt Stable Diffusion Inpainting to accept
depth maps as input similar to the changes made for Mir-
rorFusion 2.0 and train this modified model on our pro-

8

Figure 10. Limitations. Our method performs well in multi-object
scenes (more than two objects) but retains some artifacts, which
can be reduced by synthesizing the dataset through the proposed
data-generation pipeline and further increasing the diversity and
scale.

posed dataset referring to it as “SDI+Depth”. We com-
pare “SDI+Depth” with MirrorFusion 2.0 in Fig. 9. While
“SDI+Depth” accurately positions objects in the mirror, it
suffers from significant artifacts, including color leakage in
contrast to MirrorFusion 2.0. We suspect that this happens
due to the early combination of the noisy latent features,
mask, and conditioning information in the initial convolu-
tion layer, restricting later layers from accessing clean fea-
tures. These findings suggest that a dual branch architecture
to provide the conditioning information separately as done
in MirrorFusion 2.0 is a better choice.

6. Conclusion

We introduce SynMirrorV2, a novel large-scale synthetic
dataset designed to advance mirror reflection generation
significantly. By employing targeted data augmentations,
we achieved robust variability in object pose, position,
and occlusion, alongside the ability to handle multi-object
scenes. Our qualitative and quantitative evaluations demon-
strate SynMirrorV2’s efficacy in reflection generation, with
promising generalization to real-world scenes using cur-
riculum training. This dataset holds substantial potential for
driving progress in various mirror-related tasks. Future re-
search will explore advanced data augmentation techniques
to enhance real-world performance further.
Acknowledgment. We are grateful to the Kotak IISc AI-
ML Center for providing the computing resources. We
thank Rishubh Parihar for their valuable feedback and
Lokesh R. Boregowda for their valuable guidance.

(a)(b)-multiple+ multiple (Ours)-multiple+ multiple (Ours)(a)(b)SDI+Depth OursSDI+DepthOursGTGeneratedGenerationGround-TruthGenerationGround-TruthReferences

[1] Adobe. Adobe firefly. https://www.adobe.com/
products/firefly.html, 2025. Accessed: 2025-03-
23. 19, 20
[2] Stability AI.

https :
/ / huggingface . co / stabilityai / stable -
diffusion-3.5-large, 2025. Accessed: 2025-03-23.
2, 3

Stable diffusion 3.5.

[3] Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended
diffusion for text-driven editing of natural images. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 18208–18218, 2022. 3
[4] Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended
latent diffusion. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), 42
(4):1–11, 2023. 3

[5] Aleksei Bochkovskii, Ama¨el Delaunoy, Hugo Germain,
Marcel Santos, Yichao Zhou, Stephan R. Richter, and
Vladlen Koltun. Depth pro: Sharp monocular metric depth in
less than a second. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2410.02073, 2024.
5

[6] Jasmine Collins, Shubham Goel, Kenan Deng, Achlesh-
war Luthra, Leon Xu, Erhan Gundogdu, Xi Zhang, Tomas
F Yago Vicente, Thomas Dideriksen, Himanshu Arora, et al.
Abo: Dataset and benchmarks for real-world 3d object un-
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
derstanding.
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 21126–
21136, 2022. 3, 4

[7] Katherine Crowson, Stefan Andreas Baumann, Alex Birch,
Tanishq Mathew Abraham, Daniel Z Kaplan, and Enrico
Shippole. Scalable high-resolution pixel-space image syn-
In Forty-first
thesis with hourglass diffusion transformers.
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 3
[8] Giannis Daras, Mauricio Delbracio, Hossein Talebi, Alexan-
dros G. Dimakis, and Peyman Milanfar. Soft diffusion:
Trans. Mach.
Score matching with general corruptions.
Learn. Res., 2023, 2023. 3

[9] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs,
Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana
Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse:
In Proceedings of
A universe of annotated 3d objects.
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 13142–13153, 2023. 3

[10] Maximilian Denninger, Dominik Winkelbauer, Martin
Sundermeyer, Wout Boerdijk, Markus Wendelin Knauer,
Klaus H Strobl, Matthias Humt, and Rudolph Triebel.
Blenderproc2: A procedural pipeline for photorealistic ren-
dering. Journal of Open Source Software, 8(82):4901, 2023.
3, 4

[11] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models
beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021. 3

[12] Ankit Dhiman, Manan Shah, Rishubh Parihar, Yash Bhalgat,
Lokesh R Boregowda, and R Venkatesh Babu. Reflecting
reality: Enabling diffusion models to produce faithful mirror
reflections, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 13

and Vincent Vanhoucke. Google scanned objects: A high-
quality dataset of 3d scanned household items. In 2022 In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pages 2553–2560. IEEE, 2022. 5, 6, 19

[14] Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming
In Pro-
transformers for high-resolution image synthesis.
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 12873–12883, 2021. 2
[15] Mark Edward M. Gonzales, Lorene C. Uy, and Joel P.
Ilao. Designing a lightweight edge-guided convolutional
neural network for segmenting mirrors and reflective sur-
faces. Computer Science Research Notes, 3301:107–116,
2023. 2

[16] Poly Haven. Poly haven : The public 3d asset library, 2025.

Accessed: 2025-03-23. 3

[17] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-
fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2, 3

[18] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William
Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video dif-
fusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 35:8633–8646, 2022. 2

[19] Yicong Hong, Kai Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Sai Bi, Yang Zhou,
Difan Liu, Feng Liu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Trung Bui, and Hao
Tan. Lrm: Large reconstruction model for single image to
3d. ArXiv, abs/2311.04400, 2023. 3

[20] Xu Ju, Xian Liu, Xintao Wang, Yuxuan Bian, Ying Shan,
and Qiang Xu. Brushnet: A plug-and-play image inpainting
model with decomposed dual-branch diffusion. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2024. 3, 4

[21] Kunal Kathare, Ankit Dhiman, K Vikas Gowda, Siddharth
Aravindan, Shubham Monga, Basavaraja Shanthappa Van-
Instructive3d: Editing
drotti, and Lokesh R Boregowda.
large reconstruction models with text instructions. In Pro-
ceedings of the Winter Conference on Applications of Com-
puter Vision (WACV), pages 3246–3256, 2025. 3

[22] Black Forest Labs. Flux. https://github.com/
black-forest-labs/flux, 2025. Accessed: 2025-
03-23. 2, 3

[23] Zhimin Li, Jianwei Zhang, Qin Lin, Jiangfeng Xiong,
Yanxin Long, Xinchi Deng, Yingfang Zhang, Xingchao Liu,
Minbin Huang, Zedong Xiao, Dayou Chen, Jiajun He, Jiahao
Li, Wenyue Li, Chen Zhang, Rongwei Quan, Jianxiang Lu,
Jiabin Huang, Xiaoyan Yuan, Xiaoxiao Zheng, Yixuan Li, Ji-
hong Zhang, Chao Zhang, Meng Chen, Jie Liu, Zheng Fang,
Weiyan Wang, Jinbao Xue, Yangyu Tao, Jianchen Zhu, Kai
Liu, Sihuan Lin, Yifu Sun, Yun Li, Dongdong Wang, Ming-
tao Chen, Zhichao Hu, Xiao Xiao, Yan Chen, Yuhong Liu,
Wei Liu, Di Wang, Yong Yang, Jie Jiang, and Qinglin Lu.
Hunyuan-dit: A powerful multi-resolution diffusion trans-
former with fine-grained chinese understanding, 2024. 2
[24] Jiaying Lin, Guodong Wang, and Rynson W.H. Lau. Pro-

gressive mirror detection. In Proc. CVPR, 2020. 2

[25] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight de-
cay regularization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017. 5

[13] Laura Downs, Anthony Francis, Nate Koenig, Brandon Kin-
man, Ryan Hickman, Krista Reymann, Thomas B McHugh,

[26] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher
Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Repaint: Inpainting

9

using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 11461–11471, 2022. 3

[27] Hayk Manukyan, Andranik Sargsyan, Barsegh Atanyan,
Zhangyang Wang, Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi.
Hd-painter: high-resolution and prompt-faithful text-guided
arXiv preprint
image inpainting with diffusion models.
arXiv:2312.14091, 2023. 2, 3

[28] Haiyang Mei, Bo Dong, Wen Dong, Pieter Peers, Xin Yang,
Qiang Zhang, and Xiaopeng Wei. Depth-aware mirror seg-
mentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3044–3053,
2021. 2

[29] Oscar Michel, Anand Bhattad, Eli VanderBilt, Ranjay Kr-
ishna, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Tanmay Gupta. Object
3dit: Language-guided 3d-aware image editing. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 2, 3

[30] Sicheng Mo, Fangzhou Mu, Kuan Heng Lin, Yanli Liu,
Freecontrol:
Bochen Guan, Yin Li, and Bolei Zhou.
Training-free spatial control of any text-to-image diffusion
model with any condition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 7465–7475, 2024. 2

[31] Rishubh Parihar, Abhijnya Bhat, Abhipsa Basu, Saswat
Mallick, Jogendra Nath Kundu, and R Venkatesh Babu.
Balancing act: distribution-guided debiasing in diffusion
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
models.
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 6668–6678,
2024. 3

[32] Rishubh Parihar, Harsh Gupta, Sachidanand VS, and
R Venkatesh Babu.
Text2place: Affordance-aware text
guided human placement. In European Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 57–77. Springer, 2024. 3

[33] Rishubh Parihar, VS Sachidanand, Sabariswaran Mani, Te-
jan Karmali, and R Venkatesh Babu. Precisecontrol: En-
hancing text-to-image diffusion models with fine-grained at-
tribute control. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 469–487. Springer, 2024. 3

[34] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models
with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, pages 4195–4205,
2023. 3

[35] Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas
Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas M¨uller, Joe Penna, and
Improving latent diffusion mod-
Robin Rombach. Sdxl:
arXiv preprint
els for high-resolution image synthesis.
arXiv:2307.01952, 2023. 2

[36] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervi-
sion. In International conference on machine learning, pages
8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 6

[37] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu,
and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image gener-
ation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1
(2):3, 2022. 3

[38] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-resolution image
In Proceedings of
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 2, 3

[39] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee,
Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, David Fleet, and Mohammad
Norouzi. Palette:
In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 conference proceedings, pages 1–10,
2022. 3

Image-to-image diffusion models.

[40] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala
Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour,
Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans,
et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep
language understanding. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 35:36479–36494, 2022. 3

[41] Ayush Sarkar, Hanlin Mai, Amitabh Mahapatra, Svetlana
Lazebnik, David A Forsyth, and Anand Bhattad. Shad-
ows don’t lie and lines can’t bend! generative models don’t
In Proceedings of
know projective geometry... for now.
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 28140–28149, 2024. 2, 3

[42] Prafull Sharma, Varun Jampani, Yuanzhen Li, Xuhui Jia,
Dmitry Lagun, Fredo Durand, Bill Freeman, and Mark
Matthews. Alchemist: Parametric control of material proper-
ties with diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 24130–24141, 2024. 3

[43] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan,
and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised learning using
In International confer-
nonequilibrium thermodynamics.
ence on machine learning, pages 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
3

[44] Tianyu Sun, Guodong Zhang, Wenming Yang, Jing-Hao
Xue, and Guijin Wang. Trosd: A new rgb-d dataset for trans-
parent and reflective object segmentation in practice. IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
33(10):5721–5733, 2023. 2

[45] Jiaqi Tan, Weijie Lin, Angel X Chang, and Manolis Savva.
Mirror3D: Depth refinement for mirror surfaces. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2021. 2

[46] Rishi Upadhyay, Howard Zhang, Yunhao Ba, Ethan Yang,
Blake Gella, Sicheng Jiang, Alex Wong, and Achuta
Kadambi. Enhancing diffusion models with 3d perspec-
tive geometry constraints. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 42(6):1–15, 2023. 2, 3

[47] A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural

Information Processing Systems, 2017. 3

[48] Bram Wallace, Akash Gokul, and Nikhil Naik. Edict: Exact
diffusion inversion via coupled transformations. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 22532–22541, 2023. 3

[49] Daniel Winter, Matan Cohen, Shlomi Fruchter, Yael Pritch,
Alex Rav-Acha, and Yedid Hoshen. Objectdrop: Bootstrap-
ping counterfactuals for photorealistic object removal and in-
sertion, 2024. 2, 3

10

[50] Xiaojun Wu, Dixiang Zhang, Ruyi Gan, Junyu Lu, Ziwei
Wu, Renliang Sun, Jiaxing Zhang, Pingjian Zhang, and Yan
Song. Taiyi-diffusion-xl: Advancing bilingual text-to-image
generation with large vision-language model support, 2024.
2

[51] Shaoan Xie, Zhifei Zhang, Zhe Lin, Tobias Hinz, and Kun
Zhang. Smartbrush: Text and shape guided object inpainting
with diffusion model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
22428–22437, 2023. 3

[52] Xin Yang, Haiyang Mei, Ke Xu, Xiaopeng Wei, Baocai Yin,
and Rynson W.H. Lau. Where is my mirror? In The IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
2, 5, 7, 19, 20

[53] Fulong Ye, Guangyi Liu, Xinya Wu, and Ledell Yu Wu. Alt-
diffusion: A multilingual text-to-image diffusion model. In
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023. 2

[54] Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. Ip-
adapter: Text compatible image prompt adapter for text-to-
image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721,
2023. 2

[55] Junyi Zeng, Chong Bao, Rui Chen, Zilong Dong, Guofeng
Zhang, Hujun Bao, and Zhaopeng Cui. Mirror-nerf: Learn-
ing neural radiance fields for mirrors with whitted-style ray
tracing. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Con-
ference on Multimedia, pages 4606–4615, 2023. 2

[56] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding
In
conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 3836–3847, 2023. 2

[57] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shecht-
man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of
deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pages 586–595, 2018. 5

[58] Shihao Zhao, Dongdong Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Jianmin
Bao, Shaozhe Hao, Lu Yuan, and Kwan-Yee K Wong.
Uni-controlnet: All-in-one control to text-to-image diffusion
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 36, 2024. 2

[59] Wenliang Zhao, Lujia Bai, Yongming Rao, Jie Zhou, and
Jiwen Lu. Unipc: A unified predictor-corrector framework
for fast sampling of diffusion models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 5

[60] Hongkai Zheng, Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, and Anima
Anandkumar. Fast training of diffusion models with masked
transformers. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2024, 2023. 3
[61] Junhao Zhuang, Yanhong Zeng, Wenran Liu, Chun Yuan,
and Kai Chen. A task is worth one word: Learning with
task prompts for high-quality versatile image inpainting. In
European Conference on Computer Vision, 2023. 3

11

MirrorVerse: Pushing Diffusion Models to Realistically Reflect the World

Supplementary Material

Contents

A. Dataset Generation

B. Architecture Details

C. Additional Details

C.1. Characteristic Comparison with SynMirror
.
C.2. Text prompts used in the experiments . . . .

D. Additional Results

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

tiple objects .

D.3. Additional

from MirrorBenchV2 .

D.1. Affect of Joint training with single and mul-
. .
.
.
D.2. Additional results from single object scenes
. . . .
.
.
results from multiple object
. . . .
D.4. Comparison by fine-tuning only on the MSD
.
.
. .
.
.
.
. . . .
D.5. User Study Details .
.
. . .
D.6. Comparison with Commercial Product

scenes from MirrorBenchV2 .

dataset .

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

12

13

16
16
16

17

17

17

17

18
19
19

A. Dataset Generation

Grounding Object. We describe the algorithm to ground
an object in Algorithm 2.
If the minimum value of the
bounding box along the z-dimension is greater than the
ground level, we adjust the object’s position to rest it on
the ground. This adjustment enhances the photorealism
of the generated dataset, ensuring objects appear naturally
grounded in their environment.

Sampling Region For random positions in front of the
mirror, we first define a region in the x-y plane where the
object and its reflection are visible in the camera view. To
determine this region, we compute the intersection of the
camera’s viewing frustum on the x-y plane with the extent
of the mirror. This process is repeated for all camera loca-
tions used in the dataset generation. The resulting sampling
region, S, ensures that any position within it allows the vis-
ibility of both the object and its reflection in the camera
view.

Object Placement We provide the procedure to place an
object in a scene in Algorithm 3. First, we scale an object
to fit inside a unit cube, ensuring uniformity across objects.
Next, we randomly sample a position in front of the mirror
and update the position of the object accordingly. Finally,

Algorithm 2 Procedure to Ground an Object

Require: Input 3D model M, Ground-Level Z

1: Function GROUNDOBJECT(M, Z)
2: bbox ← GETBOUNDINGBOX3D(M)
3: if bbox.z > Z then
z ← bbox.z − Z
4:
5: ∆t ← [0, 0, −z]
6: M.position ← M.position + ∆t
7: end if

Algorithm 3 Procedure to Place an Object in a scene

Require: Input 3D model M, Ground-Level Z, Sampling

region S

dmax

1: Function NORMALIZEOBJECT(M)
2: bbox ← GETBOUNDINGBOX3D(M)
3: dmax ← GetMaxDimension(bbox)
4: s ← 1
5: Smatrix ← GetScaleMatrix(s)
6: M.scale ← Smatrix
7: bbox ← GETBOUNDINGBOX3D(M)
8: return bbox
9:
10: Function SAMPLEPOSITION(M, S)
11: t ← SamplePosition(S)
12: M.translation ← t
13: bbox ← GETBOUNDINGBOX3D(M)
14: return bbox
15:
16: Function RANDOMROTATION(M)
17: θ ← RandomAngle(S)
18: Rmatrix ← GetRotationMatrix(θ)
19: M.rotation ← Rmatrix
20: bbox ← GETBOUNDINGBOX3D(M)
21: return bbox
22:
23: Main Algorithm
24: bbox ← NORMALIZEOBJECT(M)
25: bbox ← SAMPLEPOSITION(M, S)
26: bbox ← RANDOMROTATION(M)

we apply a random rotation around the vertical axis. These
steps guarantee that the object and its reflection remain vis-
ible in the camera’s field of view. Further, these steps intro-
duce greater diversity to the dataset.

Additional Samples. We provide additional samples for
scenes with single object in Fig. 13 and multiple objects in

12

Figure 11. Overview of architecture used for the experiments.

Figure 12. Samples of scenes containing more than two objects.

Figs. 12 and 14. Further, we also provide additional sam-
ples for visualization from SynMirrorV2 in folder “dataset-
samples” in the attached supplementary material.

B. Architecture Details

Our work builds upon the MirrorFusion framework [12],
which employs a conditioning network that leverages depth
information to guide the generation process of a pre-trained
generative network. This model is trained using a three-
stage curriculum learning strategy, as detailed in Sec. 4.

13

EncDecText Embedding“A perfect plane mirror reflection of <object caption>”512 x 512 x 3512 x 512 x 1512 x 512 x 164 x 64 x 164 x 64 x 164 x 64 x 464 x 64 x 464 x 64 x 10DownsampleDownsampleFrozen U-NetTrainable U-NetVAE Encoder/DecoderDepthConditioningMirrorMaskFrozen❄❄Figure 13. Samples of scene containing single object from SynMirrorV2

14

Figure 14. Samples of scene containing multiple objects from SynMirrorV2

15

Table 4. Comparison of the proposed dataset, SynMirrorV2 ,
with SynMirror

Augmentations Grounding

SynMirror
SynMirrorV2

✗
✓

Random
Rotations
✗
✓

Random
Positions
✗
✓

Multiple
Objects
✗
✓

Occlusion
Scenarios
✗
✓

C. Additional Details

C.1. Characteristic Comparison with SynMirror

We present a characteristic comparison of the proposed
dataset with SynMirror in Tab. 4. This variety aids in the
generalization of the MirrorFusion 2.0 to complex scenar-
ios and real-world scenes.

C.2. Text prompts used in the experiments

We provide the text prompts used in the main paper for im-
age generation.

Figure 1. Each row in this figure uses the same text
prompt. Text prompts are as follows:
• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A cylin-
drical bottle with a spherical top and bottom, featuring a
neck and spout.) and (A cylinder with a conical bottom
and a spherical top.)”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a yel-
low mug with a flower design is placed on a desk in front
of a mirror. The reflection of the mug can be seen in the
mirror, creating an interesting visual effect where the mug
appears to be floating.”

Figure 4. Text prompts are as follows:
• (a) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a chair with a

high, rounded back and blue upholstery.”

• (b) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (3D model of
a Chesterfield sofa with cylindrical and spherical ele-
ments.) and (3D model of a two-seater sofa with backrest
and armrests.)”

Figure 5. Text prompts are as follows:
• (a) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a black color fur-

niture in stair shape with multiple drawers.”

• (b) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a yellow and

white mug on a grey surface.”

Figure 6. Text prompts for “Column-1” are as follows:
• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a curved
and slatted 3D chair with backrest, seat, armrests, and
footrest.”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a crois-
sant that is chocolate and covered in nuts on one side and
plain on the other.”

• Third row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A
wooden stool with a backrest and a seat.) and (3D model
of a lamp with a cylindrical body, spherical base, coni-
cal bottom, spherical top, and a cylindrical shade with a
spherical accent.)”

• Fourth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (King
size bed with a slatted base, tufted headboard and foot-
board, curved backrest and armrest, and slanted top and
bottom edges.) and (A 3D object with a truncated octag-
onal base and a spherical top.)”
Text prompts for “Column-2” are as follows:

• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of an orange
vat sitting on a grey metal frame with a light gray colored
control box attached.”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a dark

blue baby buggy with no one in it.”

• Third row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A 3D
model of a single-seater Chesterfield sofa with a tufted
back, curved backrest, and slanted seat.) and (Rectangu-
lar cabinet with a slanted roof and base, featuring a door
and a drawer, 3D modeled as a TV stand.)”

• Fourth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (3D
model of a kitchen cart with three shelves, two drawers on
each side, and a two-tiered bunk bed with slatted bases.)
and (Three-tiered wheeled cart with shelves and a han-
dle.)”

Figure 7. Text prompts for “Column-1” are as follows:
• First row. “The dynamics of the mirror and its reflections
involve the use of a cardboard box. The box is placed on
top of a table, and the mirror is positioned in such a way
that it reflects the surrounding environment.”

• Second row. “The mirror’s reflection in the cord cre-
ates an interesting visual effect, making it appear as if the
cord is coming out of the mirror itself. This setup can be
useful for individuals who need to charge their electronic
devices while working.”

• Third row.

‘A pink portable charger is placed on a
wooden table next to a mirror. The mirror reflects the
portable charger, creating an interesting dynamic be-
tween the object and its reflection in the mirror.”

• Fourth row. “The mirror reflects a pile of dirty clothes
or towels, which appear to be wrinkled and disheveled.
This phenomenon is caused by the way light bounces off
the surface of the mirror and interacts with the objects in
front of it”
Text prompts for “Column-2” are as follows:

• First row. “Anamorphosis is a technique used to create
distorted images that appear normal when viewed from a
specific vantage point. In this case, the viewer needs to
be positioned directly in front of the mirror to see the full
effect of the toy”

• Second row. “A toy mouse-shaped mirror is placed on a

16

Table 5. Ablation studies on mixed-training for multiple objects

D.2. Additional results from single object scenes

Metrics

Models

Reflection Generation Quality

Text Alignment

PSNR ↑

SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

CLIP Sim ↑

Joint Training
Ours 50k

17.41
18.00

0.615
0.744

0.153
0.119

26.37
26.09

table in front of a yellow cylindrical object. The mirror
reflects the environment around it, including the yellow
cylinder and other objects in the room.”

• Third row. “The mirror is reflecting a small button with
a cartoon character on it, which is placed on a white sur-
face. The reflection of the button in the mirror creates an
interesting visual effect, as the character appears to be
floating or hovering”

• Fourth row. “The mirror in the image is reflecting two
toy figures, a red one and a blue one, as they interact with
each other. This dynamic creates a playful and imagina-
tive scene, as the toys appear to be having a conversa-
tion.”

Figure 8. Text prompts are as follows:
• (a) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A swivel chair
with a mesh seat, backrest, and swivel base.) and (A
wooden cuboid stool with a square base, slanted squar-
ish seat, and slanted backrest.)”

• (b) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (L-shaped sec-
tional sofa with U-shaped backrest, 3D model.) and (A
king size bed with a tufted headboard, footboard, slatted
base, and a single seater sofa with a backrest and seat
cushion.)”

Figure 9. Text prompts are as follows:
• (a) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a red and white

striped round life buoy surrounded in a cord.”
• (b) “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a rug”

D. Additional Results

D.1. Affect of Joint training with single and multiple

objects

An ablation study in Tab. 5 reveals the significant impact
of staged training on generalization. Training on single and
multiple splits simultaneously yielded inferior results, high-
lighting the importance of our staged approach. Curriculum
training further allows us to fine-tune on real-world data
such as the MSD dataset, providing better results than direct
single-stage training as shown in Appendix D.4 and Fig. 16.

from MirrorBenchV2

We present additional results for single objects in Fig. 15.
Observe that the baseline method produces several inaccu-
racies: the object (Column 1, Row 2) appears to be floating
in mid-air with incorrect orientation, and the bullets (Col-
umn 2, Row 2) are also misaligned. Additionally, the re-
flection of the wooden table (Column 1, Row 5) has dis-
torted legs. In contrast, our results accurately capture the
geometry and appearance of the object in its reflection.

Text prompts for “Column-1” in Fig. 15 are as follows:
• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a shiny
dark wooden pepper mill, stood upright, with a silver or-
nament on the top.”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a white
gravy boat with designs of pink flowers on the side and
front with green folliage.”

• Third row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a orange

and black two wheeled hoverboard.”

• Fourth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a 3D
swivel chair model with a curved backrest, armrests, and
a swivel base.”

• Fifth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a swivel
chair with a slender, curved backrest and armrests, fea-
turing a slanted seat.”
Text prompts for “Column-2” in Fig. 15 are as follows:
• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a swivel
chair with a slender, curved backrest and armrests, fea-
turing a slanted seat.”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of two

metal bullets for either a gun or cannon.”

• Third row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a two-
seater sofa with curved backrest, slanted seat, and arm-
rests.”

• Fourth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a 3D
lamp with a cylindrical metal arm, spherical metal base,
and spherical glass shade.”

• Fifth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a rectan-
gular table with a slatted, slanted top, hairpin legs, and a
metal frame.”

D.3. Additional results from multiple object scenes

from MirrorBenchV2

We present additional results for multiple objects in Fig. 19.
The baseline method struggles to generate accurate reflec-
tions in scenes with multiple objects compared to its perfor-
mance in single-object scenes. Notably, reflections of two
sofas (Column 1, Row 4) and a sofa-table (Column 2, Row
4) pair are incorrectly merged, and in some cases, only a
single object is rendered in the reflection. This poor perfor-
mance is primarily due to the limited diversity of the dataset
used to train the baseline method. In contrast, our approach
preserves the original geometry of the objects, accurately

17

captures their spatial relationships, and maintains their ap-
pearance, resulting in significantly more realistic and con-
sistent reflections for scenes with multiple objects.

Text prompts for “Column-1” in Fig. 19 are as follows:
• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a (rug)
and (Rectangular cabinet with a slanted roof and base,
featuring a door and a drawer, 3D modeled as a TV
stand.).”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a (3D
model of a chair with a backrest, armrests, and seat.) and
(Spherical table with a round top, square slanted base,
and two slender legs.).”

• Third row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A 3D
model of a chair with a curved, tufted backrest, padded
seat, armrests, and a squarish bowl with a matching base
and lid.) and (rug).”

• Fourth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A 3D
model of a two to three-seater sofa with a curved, tufted
backrest, armrests, and a footrest.) and (3D model of a
three-seater sofa with a curved backrest and armrests.).”
• Fifth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (Cylindri-
cal stool with a spherical top, square base, slanted seat,
and backrest.) and (A cuboid with a base, spherical lid,
and slanted top and bottom.).”

• Sixth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A cylin-
der with a spherical base and a spherical shade.) and
(3D object: Slatted swivel chair with a curved, slanted X-
shaped backrest and seat, featuring armrests and legs.).”
• Seventh row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (3D
model of a chaise lounge featuring a curved backrest,
cushioned seat, armrests, and footrest, made from a sin-
gle piece of foam.) and (A 3D object resembling a book
with a convex spine, slanted top and bottom edges, and
stacked pages.).”

• Eigth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (Two-
seater couch with backrest and armrests, and a tetrahe-
dral box with lid.) and (3D model of a rectangular coffee
table with a slanted shelf on top, supported by a slanted
frame.).”
Text prompts for “Column-2” in Fig. 19 are as follows:
• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (3D
model of stacked cylindrical objects with spherical tops,
resembling trash cans or water cisterns, featuring a tetra-
hedral cuboid and a truncated octahedral.) and (Three-
drawer dresser with a slanted top, rectangular base, and
rectilinear design.).”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a (3D
model of a chair with a backrest, armrests, and seat.) and
(Spherical table with a round top, square slanted base,
and two slender legs.).”

• Third row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (rug)
and (3D model of a slanted rectangular coffee table in
3ds Max, available for download.).”

• Fourth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (Three-
seater grey sofa with a curved backrest and armrests in
3D.) and (A 3D tetrahedral desk with a slanted top, two
drawers, a shelf, and a truncated triangular base.).”

• Fifth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A 3D
model of a rectangular table with a pair of legs and a top.)
and (Two-seater sofa with curved backrest and armrests,
3D model.).”

• Sixth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (Swivel
bar stool with a cylindrical seat, curved backrest, and
swivel functionality.) and (Tall cabinet with a triangu-
lar base, slanted roof, flat top, and a retractable banner
stand.).”

• Seventh row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A
wooden stool with a backrest and a seat.) and (3D model
of a lamp with a cylindrical body, spherical base, coni-
cal bottom, spherical top, and a cylindrical shade with a
spherical accent.).”

• Eigth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A king-
size platform bed with a box-shaped, curved-top head-
board, footboard, side rails, slatted base, and curved
backrest.) and (U-shaped sectional sofa with multiple L-
shaped sections, featuring backrests and armrests.).”

D.4. Comparison by fine-tuning only on the MSD

dataset

To highlight the impact of the proposed dataset SynMir-
rorV2 and stage-wise training more profoundly, we com-
pare our model (which is trained in 3 stages with the first
two involving SynMirrorV2) with the model only finetuned
directly on the MSD dataset for 10k iterations (i.e only stage
3) from the Stable Diffusion v1.5 checkpoint. We call the
fine-tuned model “MSD-10k-FT”. We compare “MSD-10k-
FT” with results from our method in Fig. 16. Note the ori-
entation of the power bank is incorrect (Second Row), a
brown toy is not generated in the reflection (Third Row)
and a pink cup is generated instead of the white teapot
(Fourth Row) in the results from “MSD-10k-FT”. This
shows the importance of the proposed synthetic dataset for
incorporating the priors of accurate mirror reflections and
the importance of stage-wise finetuning to bridge the gener-
alization gap.

Text prompts used in Fig. 16 are as follows:

• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a card-

board box placed on top of a table”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a pink

portable charger is placed on a wooden table.”

• Third row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a toy
poop emoji figurine placed along with a blue cuboid and
a green cylindrical object.”

• Fourth row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a pink

and white ceramic mug with a smiling face on it.”

18

Figure 15. Results on scenes with single objects. More discussion in Appendix D.2.

D.5. User Study Details

tion.

We provide details of the user study described in Sec-
tion 4 of the main paper. We selected 40 samples, in-
cluding single-object and multi-object scenes, from Mir-
rorBenchV2, GSO [13], and real-world scenes from
MSD [52]. These samples were generated by the baseline
method MirrorFusion and our method MirrorFusion 2.0.

We invited 29 participants (aged 18–50) to compare re-
sults based on the realism and plausibility of mirror reflec-
tions. Each task involved evaluating and selecting the best
result among the outputs from both models with instructions
to assess factors such as:
• Apparent distance and alignment of objects in the reflec-

• Geometry consistency and subtle details in reflections.
• Floor reflections and shadow orientations, if present.

Fig. 17 shows that our method was preferred in 84% of

cases.

D.6. Comparison with Commercial Product

We compare our method with Adobe Firefly [1] in Fig. 18.
Our method demonstrates superior performance compared
to a widely used commercial product, Adobe Firefly, in gen-
erating accurate reflections on a mirror plane. Notably, the
commercial product places reflections incorrectly for mul-
tiple objects in the scene (top row) and mispositions the re-
flection of the yellow mug (bottom row). Additionally, the

19

InputInputMirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOursFigure 17. Visual comparison of outputs from our method and the
baseline. We discuss in detail in Appendix D.5

Figure 18. Comparison with Adobe Firefly [1]. We discuss in
detail in Appendix D.6

mirror, creating an interesting visual effect where the mug
appears to be floating.”

Figure 16. Comparison with “MSD-10k-FT”. We finetune our
model directly on the MSD dataset [52] for 10k iterations and
compare the results with our full 3-stage finetuning approach.
More discussion in Appendix D.4.

orientation of objects in the inpainted region is inaccurate.
In contrast, our method consistently generates reflections in
the correct positions while preserving their proper orienta-
tion and appearance, resulting in more realistic and visually
accurate outcomes. Text prompts used in Fig. 18 are as fol-
lows:
• First row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of (A cylin-
drical bottle with a spherical top and bottom, featuring a
neck and spout.) and (A cylinder with a conical bottom
and a spherical top.)”

• Second row. “A perfect plane mirror reflection of a yel-
low mug with a flower design is placed on a desk in front
of a mirror. The reflection of the mug can be seen in the

20

InputMSD-10k-FTOursMirrorFusion 15.9%MirrorFusion 2.0 (ours)84.1%Inpainting User Studya) SD generations MaskInputAdobe FireﬂyOursFigure 19. Results on scenes with single objects. More discussion in Appendix D.3.

21

InputInputMirrorFusionOursMirrorFusionOurs